Resource: Resource: Company Name: Constellation Energy Corporatio

Business summary:
 ITEM 1. 

BUSINESS 

##TABLE_END

General 

On February 21, 2021, the Board of Directors of Exelon Corporation (&#8220;Exelon&#8221;) authorized management to pursue a plan to separate its competitive generation and customer-facing energy businesses, conducted through Constellation Energy Generation, LLC (&#8220;Constellation&#8221;, formerly Exelon Generation Company, LLC) and its subsidiaries, into an independent, publicly traded company. Constellation Energy Corporation (&#8220;CEG Parent&#8221; or the &#8220;Company&#8221;), a Pennsylvania corporation and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of Exelon, was newly formed for the purpose of separation and had not engaged in any activities except in preparation for the distribution. On February 1, 2022, Exelon completed the separation by distributing all the outstanding shares of the Company&#8217;s common stock, on a pro rata basis to the holders of Exelon&#8217;s common stock, with the Company holding all the interests in Constellation previously held by Exelon (the "Separation"). As of 2002, Constellation has been an individual registrant since the registration of their public debt securities under the Securities Act. As an individual registrant, Constellation has historically filed consolidated financial statements to reflect their financial position and operating results as a stand-alone, wholly owned subsidiary of Exelon. 

Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references herein to the terms "we," "our," "us" and "the Company" refer collectively to CEG Parent and Constellation. See Glossary for defined terms. 

Our Business 

We are the nation&#8217;s largest producer of carbon-free energy and a leading supplier of energy products and services to businesses, homes, community aggregations and public sector customers across the continental United States, including three-fourths of Fortune 100 companies. Our generation fleet of nuclear, hydro, wind, and solar generation facilities has the generating capacity to power the equivalent of 16 million homes, producing about 10 percent of the carbon-free energy in the United States. Constellation&#8217;s fleet is helping to accelerate the nation&#8217;s transition to a carbon-free future with more than 33,094 megawatts of capacity and an annual output that is nearly 90 percent carbon-free. This makes us an important partner to businesses and state and local governments that are setting ambitious carbon-reduction goals and seeking long-term solutions to the climate crisis. We employ approximately 13,871 people, and do business in 48 states, the District of Columbia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. 

Our generation fleet produces more clean, carbon-free energy than any other company in the United States. We are committed to a clean energy future, and we believe our generation fleet is essential to helping meet clean energy targets, at both the state and national level. Our customer-facing business is one of the nation's largest competitive energy suppliers, offering innovative solutions along the sustainability continuum to meet customer clean energy and climate goals. 

Our Operations 

We operate the largest carbon-free generation fleet in the nation and are one of the largest competitive electric generation companies in the country, as measured by owned and contracted MWs. Collectively, the combined fleet is nearly 90% carbon-free (based on generation output of electricity) and is the third largest generation portfolio in the U.S. in terms of total generation with meaningful geographic diversity, according to the 2023 Ceres Benchmarking Air Emissions of the 100 Largest Electric Power Producers in the United States. 

At December 31, 2023, our owned generating resources total capacity of 33,094 MWs consisted of the following: 

__________ 

(a) Net generation capacity is stated at proportionate ownership share. See ITEM 2. PROPERTIES for additional information. 

(b) Includes wind, hydroelectric, and solar generating assets. 

In addition to the owned generating resources above, at December 31, 2023 we have contracted generation with a total capacity of 4,103 MWs, which represents electric supply procured under unit-specific agreements. 

The following map illustrates the locations of our owned generation facilities as of December 31, 2023: 

The Company's Generation Fleet Map (a)(b) 

Owned Assets 

__________ 

(a) Note: One symbol is included per location. Some locations may have multiple generating units. Locations in tight geographic proximity may appear as one symbol. Units that are not currently operational are not captured. 

(b) Does not reflect Grand Prairie Generating Station (Gas/Other), located in Alberta, Canada. 

We have five reportable segments, as described in the table below, representing the different geographic regions in which our owned generating resources are located and our customer-facing activities are conducted. 

##TABLE_START Segment Net Generation Capacity (MWs) (a) 

% of Net Generation Capacity Geographic Regions 

Mid-Atlantic 10,393 32 % Eastern half of PJM, which includes New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware, the District of Columbia, and parts of Pennsylvania and North Carolina Midwest 11,605 35 % Western half of PJM and the United States footprint of MISO, excluding MISO&#8217;s Southern Region New York 3,093 9 % NYISO ERCOT 4,734 14 % Electric Reliability Council of Texas Other Power Regions 3,269 10 % New England, South, West, and Canada Total 33,094 100 % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Net generation capacity is stated at proportionate ownership share as of December 31, 2023. See ITEM 2. PROPERTIES for additional information. 

The following table shows our total owned sources of electric supply of 202,474 GWhs and 200,962 GWhs for 2023 and 2022, respectively: 

_________ 

(a) Includes the proportionate share of output where we have an undivided ownership interest in jointly-owned generating plants. 

(b) Includes wind, hydroelectric, and solar generating assets. 

In addition to the owned generation above, we also had purchased power from the spot energy markets that are administered by the RTOs/ISOs and bilateral transactions of 67,215 GWhs and 70,682 GWhs for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS for additional information on electric supply sources. 

Nuclear Facilities 

Our nuclear fleet is the nation&#8217;s largest, with current generating capacity of approximately 22 GWs; it produced 174 TWhs of zero-emissions electricity during 2023 &#8211; enough to power 16 million homes and avoid more than 123 million metric tons of carbon emissions according to the EPA GHG Equivalencies Calculator. We have ownership interests in 14 nuclear generating stations currently in service, consisting of 25 units. As of December 31, 2023, we wholly own all our nuclear generating stations, except for undivided ownership interests in five jointly owned nuclear stations: Quad Cities (75% ownership), Peach Bottom (50% ownership), Salem (42.59% ownership), Nine Mile Point Unit 2 (82% ownership), and STP 44% ownership), that are included in our consolidated financial statements relative to our proportionate ownership interest in each unit. See ITEM 2. PROPERTIES for additional information on our nuclear facilities. 

On November 1, 2023. we acquired NRG South Texas LP, which owns a 44% undivided ownership interest in the jointly owned STP. See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the acquisition of STP. 

On August 6, 2021, Constellation and EDF entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which we, through a wholly owned subsidiary, purchased EDF&#8217;s equity interest in CENG, a joint venture with EDF, which wholly owned the Calvert Cliffs and Ginna nuclear stations and Nine Mile Point Unit 1, in addition to the 82% undivided ownership interest in Nine Mile Point Unit 2. Prior to August 6, 2021, we had a 50.01% membership interest in CENG, however CENG is consolidated within our results for all periods presented. See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the acquisition of EDF's equity interest in CENG and the CENG consolidation. 

We operate all of these nuclear generating stations, except for the units at Salem and STP, which are operated by PSEG Nuclear, LLC (an indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of PSEG) and STPNOC, respectively. We have consistently operated our nuclear plants at best-in-class levels. During 2023, 2022, and 2021, our nuclear generating facilities achieved capacity factors (a) of 94.4%, 94.8%, and 94.5%, respectively, at ownership percentage. The nuclear capacity factor has been approximately four percentage points better than the industry average annually since 2013. 

Capacity factors, which are significantly affected by the number and duration of refueling and non-refueling outages, can have a significant impact on our results of operations. In 2023, we achieved an average refueling outage duration of 21 days for units we operate. We achieved an average refueling outage duration of 21 and 22 days in 2022 and 2021, respectively, against industry averages of 40 and 32 days, respectively. 

We manage our scheduled refueling outages to minimize their duration and to maintain high nuclear generating capacity factors, resulting in a stable supply position for our wholesale and retail power marketing activities. In 2023, 2022, and 2021, electric supply (in GWhs) generated from our nuclear generating facilities was 65%, 64%, and 65%, respectively, of our total electric supply. 

During scheduled refueling outages, we perform maintenance and equipment upgrades in order to maintain safe, reliable operations and to minimize the occurrence of unplanned outages. In addition to the maintenance and equipment upgrades performed by us during scheduled refueling outages, we have extensive operating and security procedures in place to ensure the safe operation of our nuclear units. We also have extensive safety systems in place to protect the plant, personnel, and surrounding area in the unlikely event of an accident or other incident. 

We have original 40-year operating licenses from the NRC for each of our nuclear units and have received 20-year operating license renewals from the NRC for all our nuclear units except Clinton. PSEG has received 20-year operating license renewals for Salem Units 1 and 2. STPNOC has received 20-year operating license renewals for STP Units 1 and 2. Peach Bottom has previously received a second 20-year license renewal from the NRC for Units 2 and 3, for a total 80-year term. See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the status of Peach Bottom's license renewal. 

__________ 

(a) Capacity factor is defined as the ratio of the actual output of a unit (or combination of units) over a period of time to its output if the unit had operated at net monthly mean capacity for that time period. See ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS for additional information. 

The following table summarizes the current license expiration dates for our nuclear facilities currently in service: 

##TABLE_START Station Unit In-Service 

Date (a) 

Current License Expiration Braidwood 1 1988 2046 2 1988 2047 Byron 1 1985 2044 2 1987 2046 Calvert Cliffs 1 1975 2034 2 1977 2036 

Clinton (b) 

1 1987 2027 

Dresden (b) 

2 1970 2029 3 1971 2031 FitzPatrick 1 1975 2034 LaSalle 1 1984 2042 2 1984 2043 Limerick 1 1986 2044 2 1990 2049 

Nine Mile Point (b) 

1 1969 2029 2 1988 2046 

Peach Bottom (c) 

2 1974 2033 3 1974 2034 Quad Cities 1 1973 2032 2 1973 2032 

Ginna (b) 

1 1970 2029 Salem 1 1977 2036 2 1981 2040 STP 1 1988 2047 2 1989 2048 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Denotes year in which nuclear unit began commercial operations. 

(b) We are currently seeking license renewals for Clinton and Dresden Units 2 and 3 to extend the operating licenses by an additional 20 years. 

(c) In February 2022, the NRC issued an order related to its review of our subsequent license renewal application for Peach Bottom and the NRC directed its staff to change the expiration dates for the licenses back to 2033 and 2034. We expect that the license expiration dates will be restored to 2053 and 2054, respectively. See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

The operating license renewal process takes approximately four years from commencement, which includes approximately two years for us to develop the application and approximately two additional years for the NRC to review the application. Depreciation provisions are based on the estimated useful lives of the stations, which generally correspond with the term of the NRC operating licenses denoted in the table above as of December 31, 2023, except for Clinton, Dresden Units 2 and 3, Ginna, NMP Unit 1, and Peach Bottom Units 2 and 3 which all assume an additional 20 years beyond current license expiration. See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters and Note 8 &#8212; Property, Plant, and Equipment of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

From August 27, 2020 through September 15, 2021, Byron and Dresden depreciation provisions were accelerated to reflect the previously announced shutdown dates of September 2021 and November 2021, respectively. On September 15, 2021, we updated the estimated useful lives for both facilities to reflect the end of 

the current NRC operating license for each unit consistent with the table above. Beginning in the third quarter of 2022, we updated Dresden depreciation provisions consistent with the license renewal as described above. See Note 7 &#8212; Early Plant Retirements and Note 8 &#8212; Property, Plant, and Equipment of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on Byron and Dresden. 

Natural Gas, Oil and Renewable Facilities (including Hydroelectric) 

We operate approximately 11 GWs of natural gas, oil, hydroelectric, wind, and solar generation assets, which provide a mix of baseload, intermediate, and peak power generation. We wholly own all our natural gas, oil, and renewable generating stations, except for: (1) Wyman 4; (2) certain wind project entities; and (3) CRP, which is owned 49% by another unrelated party. We operate all of these facilities, except for Wyman 4, which is operated by the principal owner, NextEra Energy Resources LLC, a subsidiary of NextEra Energy, Inc. See ITEM 2. PROPERTIES for additional information regarding these generating facilities and Note 22 &#8212; Variable Interest Entities of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding CRP, which is a VIE. 

In 2023, 2022, and 2021, electric supply (in GWhs) generated from our owned natural gas, oil, and renewable generating facilities was 11%, 10%, and 10%, respectively, of our total electric supply. Our natural gas, oil and renewable fleet has similarly demonstrated a track record of strong performance with a Dispatch Match (a) of 98.5%, 98.2%, and 71.7% and Renewables Energy Capture (b) of 96.4%, 96.5%, and 96.6% in 2023, 2022, and 2021, respectively. Our Dispatch Match performance in 2021 was significantly impacted by the February 2021 extreme weather event in Texas. See Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Natural gas, oil, wind and solar generation plants are generally not licensed, and, therefore, the decision on when to retire plants is, fundamentally, a commercial one. FERC has the exclusive authority to license most non-federal hydropower projects located on navigable waterways or federal lands, or connected to the interstate electric grid, which include our Conowingo Hydroelectric Project (Conowingo) and Muddy Run Pumped Storage Facility Project (Muddy Run). Muddy Run's license expires on December 1, 2055 and is currently being depreciated over an estimated useful life that corresponds with the available license term. In March 2021, FERC issued a new 50-year license for Conowingo, which was subsequently vacated in December 2022; however, depreciation provisions continue to assume an estimated useful life through 2071 in anticipation of the license expiration date being restored. See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the status of Conowingo's license. 

On March 31, 2021 and June 30, 2021, we completed the sale of a significant portion of our solar business and our interest in the Albany Green Energy biomass facility, respectively. See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these dispositions. 

__________ 

(a) Dispatch Match is used to measure the responsiveness of a unit to the market, expressed as the total actual energy revenue net of fuel cost relative to the total desired energy revenue net of fuel cost. Factors having an adverse effect on Dispatch Match include forced outages, derates, and failure to operate to the desired generation signal. Beginning in 2023, Dispatch Match reflects a change to remove the Conowingo run-of-river hydroelectric operational performance. Prior year Dispatch Match for 2022 and 2021 was previously reported as 98.4% and 72.4%, respectively. 

(b) Renewable Energy Capture is an indicator of how efficiently the installed assets capture the natural energy available from the wind, the sun and water. Renewable Energy Capture represents an energy-based fraction, the numerator of which is the energy produced by the sum of the wind turbines, solar panels, and run-of-river hydroelectric operations in the year, and the denominator of which is the total expected energy to be produced during the year, with adjustments made for certain events that are considered non-controllable, such as force majeure events, serial design-manufacturing equipment failures, and transmission curtailments. Renewable Energy Capture for the combined wind, solar, and run-of-river hydroelectric fleet is weighted by the relative site projected pre-tax variable revenue. Beginning in 2023, Renewable Energy Capture reflects a change to include the Conowingo run-of-river hydroelectric operational performance. Prior year Renewable Energy Capture for 2022 and 2021 was previously reported as 95.8% and 95.7%, respectively. 

Contracted Generation 

In addition to energy produced by owned generation assets, we source electricity from generators we do not own under long-term contracts. The following tables summarize our long-term contracts to purchase unit-specific physical power with an original term in excess of one year in duration, by region, in effect as of December 31, 2023: 

##TABLE_START Region Number of Agreements Expiration Dates Capacity (MWs) 

Mid-Atlantic 

8 2024 - 2035 319 Midwest 3 2026 - 2032 351 ERCOT 7 2025 - 2035 981 Other Power Regions 16 2024 - 2037 2,452 Total 34 4,103 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 Thereafter Total Capacity Expiring (MW) 101 501 398 5 58 3,040 4,103 ##TABLE_END

Customer-Facing Business 

We are one of the nation&#8217;s largest energy suppliers. Through our integrated business operations, we sell electricity, natural gas, and other energy-related products and sustainable solutions to various types of customers, including distribution utilities, municipalities, cooperatives, and commercial, industrial, public sector, and residential customers in markets across multiple geographic regions. We serve approximately 2 million total customers, including three-fourths of Fortune 100 companies, and approximately 1.7 million unique residential customers. 

We are a leader in electric power supply, serving approximately 205 TWhs in 2023 through sales to retail customers and wholesale load auctions to a diverse geographic customer base. The following table illustrates these volumes across our five reportable segments: 

2023 Electric Power Supply (TWhs) Served (a ) 

__________ 

(a) Includes retail load and wholesale load auction volumes only. Electric generation in excess of our total retail and wholesale load would be marketed to the respective RTO or ISO in which our facility is located. Other includes New England, South, and West. 

We are active in all domestic wholesale power and gas markets that span the entire lower 48 states and have complementary retail activity across many of those states. We typically obtain power supply from the market to meet our wholesale and retail obligations; our market risk is mitigated by our owned and contracted generation located in multiple geographic regions. The commodity risks associated with the output from owned and contracted generation are managed using various commodity transactions including sales to retail customers, trades on commodity exchanges, and sales to wholesale counterparties in accordance with our hedging program. See further discussion of the hedging program in the Price and Supply Risk Management section below. The main objective is to obtain low-cost energy supply to meet physical delivery obligations to both our wholesale and retail customers. 

Retail Market 

Retail competition in states across the U.S. range from full competition of energy suppliers for all retail customers (commercial, industrial, public sector, and residential) to partial retail competition available up to a capped amount for C&#38;I customers only. We are a leader in retail markets, serving approximately 143 TWhs of electric power retail load and approximately 800 Bcf of gas in 2023, primarily to C&#38;I customers across multiple geographic regions in the U.S. 

Constellation Retail has a Diverse Geographic Footprint 

Strong customer relationships are a key part of our customer-facing business strategy, as demonstrated by our high renewal rates. Retail customer renewal rates have been strong over the last seven years across C&#38;I power customer groups, with average contract terms of approximately two years and customer duration of approximately six years, with many customers well beyond these metrics. Specifically, we enjoyed renewal rates of 75% for C&#38;I power customers and 90% for C&#38;I gas customers in 2023, owing to both our competitive pricing as well as our strong customer relationships. Our consistently high renewal rates are driven by our ability to provide customized solutions and deliver focused attention to our customers&#8217; needs, resulting in an industry-leading C&#38;I customer-service business ranking in the DNV 2023 Energy Blueprint: Sales Strategies report. We are also successful at acquiring new customers by offering innovative services and products that meet their needs. In addition to our high customer renewal rates, we have produced consistently high new win rates for C&#38;I 

power as well, acquiring nearly one out of every three new customers who have chosen to shop with us over the past five years. 

High customer satisfaction levels, market expertise, stability and scale drive growth and result in historically proven business with consistent margins. While providing customers with the best possible price is a key focus, we leverage our broad suite of electric and gas product structures, oftentimes customized, to provide customers with the commodity solution and information that best fits their needs. It is this attention to the customer that creates the durable, repeatable value highlighted in these statistics. 

Consumer purchasing strategies have trended from direct supply relationships to third-party relationships with a number of customers looking to third-party consultants and brokers to find suppliers like us to reduce costs and evaluate the increasing number of options available for expanding energy solutions beyond the commodity. In response, we have expanded our third-party capabilities, created scale through a comprehensive support structure, and enhanced digital applications providing tools, tracking, and measurement, as well as the ability to extend the reach of our sustainability solutions to drive additional market share. While this trend of customers using third parties to find suppliers has slowed in recent years, we have remained the market leader in direct C&#38;I sales with over 33% of the C&#38;I market share of direct customer business driven by our highly experienced and long-tenor direct sales team. 

Wholesale Market 

Our wholesale channel-to-market involves the sale of electricity among electric utilities and electricity marketers before it is eventually sold to end-use consumers. In 2023, we served approximately 62 TWhs of power load across competitive utility load procurement and bilateral sales to municipalities, co-ops, and other wholesale entities. Complementary to our national customer portfolio, we have several decades of relationships with wholesale counterparties across all domestic power markets as a means of both monetizing our own generation, as well as sourcing contracted generation to meet customer and portfolio needs. With increased customer demand for sustainability, our ability to source contracted generation has provided a capital-light way for us to provide customers with long-term sustainable solutions they are demanding to support a cleaner energy ecosystem. This creates durable customer relationships and repeatable business through the ability to respond to customer and marketplace trends. Similarly, this contracting acumen provides the ability to supplement our native generation with other non-renewable assets to meet changing portfolio needs in a financially efficient manner. In our wholesale gas business we participate across all parts of the gas value chain, including trading, transport and storage and physical supply. 

Energy Solutions 

As one of the largest customer-facing platforms in the U.S., we benefit from significant economies of scale, that allow us to provide our customers with competitively priced energy and to structure highly tailored solutions targeted to a customer&#8217;s unique power needs and clean energy goals. We partner with our customers to provide options along the sustainability continuum, including renewable, efficiency and digital solutions to meet their carbon-free energy goals. Our energy efficiency products provide the ability to optimize performance and maximize efficiency across customer facilities and operations through contract structures that include implementation of energy efficiency upgrades with no upfront capital requirements. Additionally, these service offerings provide scalable solutions to meet sustainability goals through investment across the life of the facility or operations and allow for budget certainty. The ongoing ability to optimize energy consumption for customers allows us to support customer demands with the right combination of technology and efficiency program options. 

Our CORe+ product serves C&#38;I customers' sustainability needs by matching contracted, third-party new-build renewable generation with customer desire to add additional carbon-free generation to the grid with geographic preference. In 2023 we rolled out our Hourly Carbon-Free Energy (CFE) platform and closed two landmark transactions with Microsoft and Commonwealth Edison. Achieving 100% carbon-free power is a key sustainability goal for many organizations. As customers make the transition to 100% carbon-free power, many are looking to bridge the gap between their real-time electricity demand and available sources of carbon-free power. Our Hourly CFE platform and associated products match carbon-free generation every hour with a customer&#8217;s load, along with appropriate tracking and retirement of hourly attributes in the applicable registry. In addition to larger-scale CORe+ offerings and Hourly CFE, we offer a range of sustainability solutions to customers (e.g., RECs, CORe, EFECs, RINs, RNG, carbon offsets, etc.) to support their energy needs during the transition to a carbon-free energy ecosystem. 

In addition to sustainability solutions, data and analytics have also become increasingly important for our customers. Our smart utility expense management platform helps customers proactively manage utility costs, understand trends, and develop strategies to optimize spend and drive sustainability objectives, while also providing utility bill payment services. This platform provides new avenues for incremental growth by coupling the opportunities for customer usage optimization with accompanying products and solutions that we can provide to customers. These types of data and analytical services allow us to grow our customer base in previously inaccessible regulated markets by offering non-commodity energy-related products and services. 

Our Constellation Technology Ventures&#8217; commercialization team invests in, and collaborates with, portfolio companies to deploy products and technologies across our broad customer base to drive value for both us and portfolio companies. Portfolio company solutions have included EV and charging infrastructure, sustainability monitoring and reporting tools, distributed energy resources, financing solutions, and more. 

Price and Supply Risk Management 

We leverage a combination of wholesale and retail customer load sales, federal and state programs, as well as non-derivative and derivative contracts, all with credit-approved counterparties, to hedge the commodity price risk of our generation portfolio. 

Beginning in 2024, our nuclear fleet is eligible for the nuclear PTC provided by the IRA, an important tool in managing commodity price risk for each nuclear unit not already receiving state support. The nuclear PTC provides increasing levels of support as unit revenues decline below levels established in the IRA and is further adjusted annually for inflation over the duration of the program. 

In locations and periods where our load serving activities do not naturally offset existing generation portfolio risk, remaining commodity price exposure is managed through portfolio hedging activities. Portfolio hedging activities are generally concentrated in the prompt three years, when customer demand and market liquidity enable effective price risk mitigation. During this prompt three-year period, we seek to mitigate price risk associated with our load serving contracts, non-nuclear generation, and any residual price risk for our nuclear generation that the nuclear PTC and state programs may not fully mitigate. We also enter transactions that further optimize the economic benefits of our overall portfolio. 

A portion of our hedging strategy may be implemented using fuel products based on assumed correlations between power and fuel prices. Our risk management group monitors the financial risks of the wholesale and retail power marketing activities. We also use financial and commodity contracts for proprietary trading purposes, but this activity accounts for only a small portion of our efforts and is not material to our results. The proprietary trading portfolio is subject to a risk management policy that includes stringent risk management limits. See ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK for additional information. 

The cycle of production and utilization of nuclear fuel includes the mining and milling of uranium ore into uranium concentrates, the conversion of uranium concentrates to uranium hexafluoride, the enrichment of the uranium hexafluoride, and the fabrication of fuel assemblies. Nuclear fuel is obtained predominantly through long-term uranium concentrate supply contracts, contracted conversion services, contracted enrichment services, or a combination thereof, including contracts sourced from Russia, and contracted fuel fabrication services. We have inventory in various forms and engage a diverse set of domestic and international suppliers to ensure we can secure the nuclear fuel needed to continue to operate our nuclear fleet. We do not anticipate difficulty in obtaining the necessary uranium concentrates or conversion, enrichment, or fabrication services to meet the nuclear fuel requirements of our nuclear fleet. We manage various risks around our nuclear fuel requirements in accordance with our fuel procurement policy limiting our transactions with each supplier to mitigate concentration of risk. The size of our inventory holdings and forward contractual coverage considers our refueling needs across multiple years to protect against supply disruptions and near-term price volatility, while allowing for capital flexibility. See ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK for additional information. 

Natural gas is procured through long-term and short-term contracts, as well as spot-market purchases. Fuel oil inventories are managed so that in the winter months sufficient volumes of fuel are available in the event of extreme weather conditions and during the remaining months to take advantage of favorable market pricing. 

See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS, ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding derivative financial instruments. 

Seasonality 

Our operations are affected by weather, which affects demand for electricity and natural gas, as well as operating conditions. The market price for electricity is also affected by changes in the demand for electricity and the available supply of electricity. With respect to the electric business, very warm weather in summer months and, with respect to the electric and natural gas businesses, very cold weather in winter months is generally referred to as &#8220;favorable weather conditions&#8221; because those weather conditions result in increased deliveries of electricity and natural gas. Conversely, mild weather reduces demand. As a result, our operating results in the future may fluctuate substantially on a seasonal basis, especially when more severe weather conditions such as heat waves or extreme winter weather make such fluctuations more pronounced. The pattern of this fluctuation may change depending on the type and location of the facilities owned, the wholesale and retail load served and the terms of contracts to purchase or sell electricity. See ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK for additional information. 

Insurance 

We are subject to liability, property damage, and other risks associated with major incidents at our generating stations. We have reduced our financial exposure to these risks through insurance, both property damage and liability, and other industry risk-sharing provisions. We also maintain business interruption insurance for our renewable projects, but not for our other generating stations unless required by contract or financing agreements. We are self-insured to the extent that any losses may exceed the amount of insurance maintained or are within the policy deductible for our insured losses. 

See ITEM 2. PROPERTIES for additional information regarding property insurance and Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for insurance specific to our nuclear facilities. 

Regulation 

CEG Parent's subsidiaries include public utilities as defined under the Federal Power Act that are subject to FERC&#8217;s exclusive ratemaking jurisdiction over wholesale sales of electricity and the transmission of electricity in interstate commerce. Under the Federal Power Act, FERC has the authority to grant or deny market-based rates for sales of energy, capacity, and ancillary services to ensure that such sales are just and reasonable. FERC&#8217;s jurisdiction over ratemaking includes the authority to suspend the market-based rates of utilities and set cost-based rates should FERC find that its previous grant of market-based rates authority is no longer just and reasonable. Other matters subject to FERC jurisdiction include, but are not limited to, certain third-party financings; review of certain mergers involving public utilities; certain dispositions of jurisdictional facilities and acquisitions of securities of another public utility or an existing operational generating facility; certain affiliate transactions; certain intercompany financings and cash management arrangements; certain internal corporate reorganizations; and certain holding company acquisitions of public utility and holding company securities. 

RTOs and ISOs are FERC-regulated entities that exist in several regions to provide transmission service across multiple transmission systems. FERC has approved PJM, MISO, ISO-NE, and SPP as RTOs and CAISO and NYISO as ISOs. These entities are responsible for regional planning, managing transmission congestion, developing wholesale markets for energy and capacity, maintaining reliability, market monitoring, and the scheduling of physical power transactions in the region. ERCOT is not subject to regulation by FERC but performs a similar function in Texas to that performed by RTOs and ISOs in markets regulated by FERC. 

We are subject to the jurisdiction of the NRC with respect to the operation of our nuclear generating facilities, including the licensing for operation of each unit. The NRC subjects nuclear generating stations to continuing review and regulation covering, among other things, operations, maintenance, emergency planning, security, and environmental and radiological aspects of those stations. As part of its Reactor Oversight Process, the NRC continuously assesses unit performance indicators and inspection results and communicates its assessment on a semi-annual basis. The NRC may modify, suspend, or revoke operating licenses and impose violations and/or 

civil penalties for failure to comply with the Atomic Energy Act, NRC regulations, or the terms of the operating licenses or orders. Changes in requirements by the NRC may require a substantial increase in capital expenditures and/or operating costs for our nuclear generating facilities. NRC regulations also require that licensees of nuclear generating facilities demonstrate reasonable assurance that funds will be available in specified minimum amounts at the end of the life of the facility to decommission the facility. We meet the ultimate decommissioning funding obligation through the use of dedicated NDT funds. See ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Liquidity and Capital Resources; Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates, Nuclear Decommissioning Asset Retirement Obligations; and Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters, Note 10 &#8212; Asset Retirement Obligations, and Note 18 &#8212; Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial statements for additional information regarding our NDT funds and decommissioning obligations. 

Our operations are also subject to the jurisdiction of various other federal, state, regional, and local agencies, and federal and state environmental protection agencies. Additionally, we are subject to NERC mandatory reliability standards, which protect the nation&#8217;s bulk power system against potential disruptions from cyber and physical security breaches. 

Constellation's Strategy and Outlook 

Strategy 

We believe shareholder value is built on a foundation of operational excellence and the pairing of our majority carbon-free energy fleet with our customer-facing platform. We are committed to maintaining investment grade credit ratings. We are focused on optimizing cash returns through a disciplined approach to safe and efficient operations and cost management, underpinned by stable and durable margins from our customer-facing businesses and coupled with distinct payments to our generation plants for the clean energy attributes. We may pursue future growth opportunities that provide additional value building on our core businesses, or expanding our competitive advantages. We are committed to maintaining a strong balance sheet, returning value to our shareholders, and investing in clean energy and sustainable solutions. 

As environmental sustainability continues to build momentum for businesses across the country, the demand for carbon-free and sustainability solutions increases. We are committed to a carbon-free energy future and aim to serve as a partner to businesses and the federal, state and local governments that are setting ambitious carbon-reduction goals and seeking long-term solutions to the climate crisis. We will be a leading advocate at the federal level and in our states for policies that will reduce GHG emissions and preserve and grow clean energy. 

We are committed to reducing our GHG emissions and enabling our C&#38;I customers through the following: 

&#8226; Achieving a generation portfolio mix with 100% of our owned generation carbon-free by 2040, including an interim goal of 95% carbon-free by 2030, subject to policy support and technology advancements, 

&#8226; A 100% reduction of our operations-driven emissions by 2040, including an interim goal to reduce carbon emissions by 65% from 2020 levels by 2030 and reduce methane emissions 30% from 2020 by 2030, subject to policy support and technology advancements and 

&#8226; Prior to the end of 2022, successfully delivered on our commitment to provide 100% of our C&#38;I customers with customer-specific information on their GHG impact for facilities contracting for power or gas supply from Constellation, that include hourly carbon-free energy matching. 

The principles of our sustainable business strategy demonstrate our commitment to a carbon-free future while maintaining a strong balance sheet, advancing our Environmental, Social, and Governance initiatives and investing in clean energy solutions. 

Power America's Clean Energy Future. We will operate and grow the nation&#8217;s largest fleet of clean, zero-emissions generation facilities, with world-class levels of safety, reliability and resiliency. 

Expand America's Largest Fleet of Clean Energy Centers. We will leverage and expand our state-of-the-art clean energy assets by exploring co-location of customer load, direct air capture of CO2, and, if supported by policy, producing clean hydrogen and other sustainable fuels to reduce industrial emissions. 

Uplift and Strengthen our Communities. We will advance respect, belonging, diversity and equity by driving community investment and creating family-sustaining clean energy jobs. 

Provide Energy and Sustainability Solutions for Customers. We will provide reliable, resilient energy and deliver innovative sustainability solutions that help customers achieve their clean energy goals. 

We are committed to maintaining sufficient financial liquidity and an appropriate capital structure to support safe, secure and reliable operations, even in volatile market conditions. We believe our investment grade credit rating is a competitive advantage and we intend to maintain our credit position and best-in-class balance sheet. In line with that commitment, available cash flow will first be used to meet investment grade credit targets, with incremental capital allocated towards disciplined growth and shareholder return. We will build upon a strong compliance and risk management foundation and recognize the critical role this serves in maximizing operational results. We will continue to manage cash flow volatility through prudent risk management strategies across our business. 

Growth Opportunities. We continually evaluate growth opportunities aligned with our businesses, assets, and markets leveraging our expertise in those areas and offering durable returns. We may pursue growth opportunities that optimize our core business or expand upon our strengths, including, but not limited to the following: 

&#8226; Opportunistic carbon-free energy acquisitions, particularly nuclear plants with supportive policy, 

&#8226; Create new value from the existing fleet through nuclear uprates, repowering of renewables, co-location of customer load (including hydrogen with supportive policy), and other opportunities, 

&#8226; Grow sustainability solutions for our customers focused on clean energy, efficiency, storage and electrification; help our C&#38;I customers develop and meet sustainability targets, 

&#8226; Engagement with the technology and innovation ecosystem through continued partnerships with national labs, universities, startups, and research institutions, and 

&#8226; Continue to monitor opportunities to participate in advanced nuclear to maintain our leadership position as stewards of a carbon-free energy future. 

We will employ a disciplined approach to acquisitions that grow future cash flow and support strategic initiatives. We will also continue to evaluate asset and business divestitures to rationalize the portfolio and optimize cash proceeds. 

Various market, financial, regulatory, legislative and operational factors could affect our success in pursuing these strategies. We continue to assess infrastructure, operational, policy, and legal solutions to these issues. See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS for additional information. 

Outlook 

The U.S. energy sector is experiencing unprecedented changes that we believe will increase the demand for reliable, clean power generation and benefit our business. We believe our generation fleet, including our nuclear assets, is well-positioned to deliver reliable, carbon-free power and benefit from growing demand for carbon-free electricity. Key drivers of increased demand for carbon-free energy include: 

&#8226; Governmental and corporate policies designed to accelerate the decarbonization of the economy, 

&#8226; Policy support for nuclear energy sources that also enable energy security, reliability and diversification, 

&#8226; Rapid electrification of the U.S. economy, and 

&#8226; Evolving customer preferences favoring clean energy, choice and digitization. 

Policy Support for Decarbonization and Emerging Carbon-Free Technologies. Driven by concerns about climate change, governments, corporations, and investors are increasingly advocating for the reduction of GHG emissions across all sectors of the economy, with reduction of GHG emissions by the energy sector being a key focus. Governments at the international, national and state levels have established or are currently contemplating 

increasingly stringent policies that require the reduction of GHG emissions over time. Corporations have also adopted targets to reduce the carbon emissions in their business operations, spurred in part by demand from investors and customers for sustainable, environment-friendly business practices. These governmental and corporate policies support the retention and expansion of carbon-free generation and the development and use of clean fuels like hydrogen. We are committed to a clean energy future and we believe our business is well-positioned to benefit from growing policy support for decarbonization as our generation fleet is essential to helping meet climate goals at both the state and federal levels. 

Policy Support for Nuclear Energy. As decarbonization accelerates, we expect our generation fleet will continue to play a critical role in meeting baseload power needs. Nuclear energy is currently the largest source of zero-emissions electricity in the U.S., accounting for over 50% of the nation&#8217;s carbon-free power and our nuclear plants are meaningful contributors to the clean energy mix in the states in which they operate. Through enactment of the nuclear PTC in the IRA, federal policymakers have recognized the need to ensure the continued operation of the nation&#8217;s nuclear power plants. This federal support builds on actions taken by states to recognize that existing nuclear generation facilities are essential to meeting policy objectives to reduce GHG emissions, with 10 states introducing bills in 2023 to add nuclear energy to clean energy targets and four of those states, including Connecticut, Michigan, North Carolina and Tennessee, finalizing such legislation. In addition, nuclear energy generation supports jobs and regional economies, and helps to ensure reliability and security of the electrical grid. For these reasons, the International Energy Agency concluded in a 2022 report, &#8220;Nuclear Power and Secure Energy Transitions,&#8221; that extending the lifetimes of existing nuclear plants is an indispensable part of a cost-effective path to net zero by 2050. As such, we plan to file applications to extend the licenses of our nuclear fleet to 80 years for our units that receive continued policy support for their long-term operation. 

Electrification of the U.S Economy. The push to significantly reduce or eliminate GHG emissions could lead to acceleration of the electrification of the U.S. economy, including electrification of transportation, industrial operations, heating and cooling, and appliances, which could materially increase demand for electricity. We expect widespread electrification, hydrogen production, data centers, and direct air capture could cause U.S. electricity demand to more than double from what it is today by 2050. Although EV sales in North America are well behind Europe and China, increased policy support through the IRA and other federal and state policies, together with an increasing number of EV offerings hitting the market over the next five years, will drive market share gains in the U.S. market. A 2023 Rhodium Group study forecasts as much as 66% of light duty vehicles sold in 2035 will be electric. Electrification of industrial processes, commercial equipment and residential appliances that currently utilize gas and oil as a fuel source will also play a role in increasing the net demand for electricity. According to the International Energy Agency, heat makes up two-thirds of industrial energy demand, and almost one-fifth of global energy consumption, prompting efforts by energy companies and industrial manufacturers to electrify their thermal processes. For companies like us whose core competency is safely generating and serving electricity and related products to its customers, the increasing demand from electrification provides natural growth opportunities. 

Evolving Customer Preferences. Consumers are increasingly purpose-driven and knowledgeable of services that drive decarbonization, leading them to value the ability to be connected to and trace the source of their clean energy choices. Growing awareness of climate change and green energy helps drive customer interest in value-add services and products around their energy usage, such as solar, behind-the-meter storage, EV charging, and the ability to choose 100 percent clean power 24 hours a day, 365 days a year in competitive retail energy markets. Continuing innovation in the digitization of the broader economy will facilitate greater control and opportunities for customers and businesses to more frequently engage with their energy providers and become more knowledgeable of their energy choices, including the solutions we provide. 

Employees 

Engaged Workforce 

Our employees are our greatest assets. We strive to create a workplace that is diverse, inclusive, innovative, and safe for our employees. In order to provide the services and products that our customers expect, we focus on creating the best teams to foster community, mutual respect and the empowerment of employees to be their authentic selves. We strive to attract highly qualified and diverse talent and routinely review our hiring, development and promotion practices to maintain equal opportunity and bias free processes. 

We develop our future workforce by focusing on three main areas: (1) elevating career awareness by promoting STEM and energy career pathways; (2) fostering equitable access by reducing and eliminating barriers; and (3) advancing the skills of workers by investing in training, reskilling and upskilling programs. To advance this strategy, in February 2023, we launched Powering Change, a $1 million workforce development program that provides grants to five non-profit organizations with a focus on these three areas. In July 2023, we expanded this effort with an additional investment of $250,000 to include a sixth organization dedicated to this work. 

We conducted an employee engagement survey at the end of 2022 to gain insight into engagement and job satisfaction within our workforce and will use it and future surveys to help identify our successes and opportunities for growth. The survey results are shared with leaders at all levels and they are also part of action planning to increase engagement. A robust action planning process is implemented that integrates both centralized action for organization-wide issues and leader-led action for areas unique to their own work groups and/or business areas. 

Career Development 

We strive to prepare our workforce for the future and help our employees develop competencies to progress in their careers. We work to continuously expand the knowledge and skills of our workforce through formal assessments, feedback, coaching, mentoring, training, leadership development programs and targeted developmental experiences. 

Well-Being and Benefits 

We help our employees maintain and improve their overall well-being, and we offer a wide range of benefits that support physical, mental, financial, and family health. Our comprehensive benefits help our employees care for themselves and their families, now and in the future. 

Community 

We actively invest in community development through philanthropic giving and employee volunteerism. We work to build a future in which our employees, customers, business associates and communities benefit equitably from social, environmental and economic progress. We provide opportunities for company-sponsored volunteerism and charitable matching gifts programs. Our employees donated $5.1 million to non-profit organizations and provided just over 102,000 volunteer hours in 2023. 

Next Generation of Talent 

We aim to attract, retain and advance a world-class workforce that effectively serves our customers and communities. We work toward this objective by sourcing and developing a diverse talent pipeline and cultivating an inclusive and respectful culture where all individuals can develop to reach their full potential. 

Through our talent acquisition strategy, we work with universities and organizations to attract and recruit STEM-focused students and professionals from diverse backgrounds. Our diversified sourcing strategy includes collaboration with specific universities, technical schools and other organizations. We established relationships with diversity-focused organizations, including Disability:IN, Recruit Military, Society of Women Engineers and National Society of Black Engineers. Through these collaborations, we participate in mentoring programs, conferences, career fairs and industry events to assist with recruiting interns and full-time employees. In 2023, we hired just over 1,500 employees. 

Diversity Metrics 

We conduct analyses of gender and racial pay equity. We also provide training and review hiring and promotion processes to avoid unconscious bias and include equal pay efforts in broader company-wide equity initiatives. These actions help to create an environment where all employees can thrive and advance as equal members of the workforce. 

The following table shows diversity metrics for all employees, management, and executives based on self-disclosed information as of December 31, 2023: 

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees Full-Time 13,813 Part-Time 58 

Total Employees 

13,871 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees 

Regular (a) 

13,833 

Temporary (b) 

Total Employees 

13,871 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees Management (c) 

Executives (d) 

Male 10,672 2,178 112 

Female 

3,078 522 32 Undisclosed 83 11 &#8212; 

Total Employees 

13,833 2,711 144 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees Management (c) 

Executives (d) 

Aged &#60;30 (e) 

13 % 2 % &#8212; % 

Aged 30-50 (e) 

56 % 63 % 47 % 

Aged &#62;50 (e) 

31 % 35 % 53 % ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees Management (c) 

Executives (d) 

Employees within 10 years of retirement (f) 

5,778 1,298 113 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Metric All Employees Management (c) 

Executives (d) 

People of Color (e) 

20 % 14 % 13 % ##TABLE_END

&#160;__________ 

(a) Regular employees hold a position where employment is for an indeterminate period and the position is expected to continue on an ongoing basis. 

(b) Temporary employees hold a position (with or without a contract) for a limited period with an expected end date, typically based on completion of a specific assignment, project, or event. 

(c) Management is defined as managers as well as all employees who have direct reports and supervisory responsibilities. 

(d) Executives are defined as vice presidents and senior level officials that plan, direct, or coordinate activities typically with the support of subordinate executives and managers. See ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE for a discussion of certain executive officers. 

(e) Metric is based on the number of regular employees. 

(f) For reporting purposes, "Employees within 10 years of retirement" are those employees who are within 10 years of age 55 and are within 10 years of service. 

Turnover Rates 

As turnover is inherent, management succession planning is performed and tracked for executives enterprise wide. Management frequently reviews succession planning to be prepared when positions become available. 

The table below shows the turnover rate for all employees, excluding temporary employees, for the year ended December 31, 2023: 

##TABLE_START All 

Involuntary Termination 

1.40 % 

Retirement (a) 

2.20 % 

Voluntary Resignation 

4.10 % ##TABLE_END

&#160;__________ 

(a) For reporting purposes, reflects employees who were at least 55 years of age and had at least 10 years of service at the time they ended employment. 

Collective Bargaining Agreements 

Approximately 25% of employees participate in CBAs. The following table presents employee information, including information about CBAs, as of December 31, 2023: 

##TABLE_START Total Employees Covered by CBAs Number of CBAs CBAs New and Renewed in 2023 (a) 

Total Employees Under CBAs 

New and Renewed 

in 2023 

3,343 21 4 410 ##TABLE_END

&#160;__________ 

(a) Does not include CBAs that were extended in 2023 while negotiations are ongoing for renewal. 

Environmental Matters and Regulation 

We are subject to comprehensive and complex environmental legislation and regulation at the federal, state, and local levels, including requirements relating to climate change, air and water quality, solid and hazardous waste, and impacts on species and habitats. 

Our Board of Directors is responsible for overseeing the management of environmental matters. We have a management team to address environmental compliance and strategy, including the CEO, and other members of senior management. Performance of those individuals directly involved in environmental compliance and strategy is reviewed and affects compensation as part of the annual individual performance review process. Our Board of Directors has delegated to its Nuclear Oversight Committee and the Corporate Governance Committee the authority to oversee our compliance with health, environmental, and safety laws and regulations and its strategies and efforts to protect and improve the quality of the environment, including our internal climate change and sustainability policies and programs, as discussed in further detail below. 

Climate Change 

Driven by concerns about climate change, governments, corporations, and investors are increasingly advocating for the reduction of GHG emissions across all sectors of the economy, with reduction of GHG emissions by the energy sector being a key focus. Governments at the international, national and state levels have established or are currently contemplating increasingly stringent policies that require the reduction of GHG emissions over time. Corporations have also adopted targets to reduce the carbon emissions in their business operations, spurred in part by demand from investors and customers for sustainable, environment-friendly business practices. Emerging technologies like storage and hydrogen are also helping to advance decarbonization. 

We believe our business is well-positioned to benefit from growing policy support for decarbonization. However, as detailed below, we also face climate change mitigation and transition risks as well as adaptation risks. Mitigation and transition risks include changes to the energy systems as a result of new technologies, changing customer expectations and/or voluntary GHG reduction goals, as well as local, state or federal regulatory requirements intended to reduce GHG emissions. Adaptation risk refers to risks to our facilities or operations that may result from changes in the physical climate, such as changes to temperatures, weather patterns and sea level rise. See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS for additional information. 

Climate Change Mitigation and Transition 

We support comprehensive federal climate legislation that addresses the climate crisis and would ensure the country meets the targets set by the Paris Climate Accord. Independent of additional legislation, we support the EPA moving forward with meaningful regulation of GHG emissions under the Clean Air Act. We currently are subject to, and may become subject to additional, federal and/or state legislation and/or regulations addressing GHG emissions. 

We are deliberately positioned as a low-carbon generation company. We have minimized GHG emitting assets in our portfolio and maximized carbon-free electric production in support of achieving economy-wide GHG emissions reduction goals. Our Scope 1 and 2 market-based GHG emissions in 2022 were 9.2 million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent, of which 8.6 million metric tons were from our natural gas and oil fueled generation fleet, significantly less than our peers with similar volume of power generation. 

We produce electricity predominantly from low and carbon-free generating facilities (such as nuclear, hydroelectric, natural gas, wind, and solar) and neither own nor operate any coal-fueled generating assets. Our natural gas and oil generating plants produce some GHG emissions, most notably CO2. In addition, we sell natural gas through our customer-facing business; and consumers&#8217; use of such natural gas produces GHG emissions. However, our owned-asset emission intensity, or rate of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) emitted per unit of electricity generated, is among the lowest in the industry. In 2023, we achieved a 94.4% percent capacity factor across our nuclear fleet and our ownership of 22 GWs of carbon-free generation capacity at 25 nuclear units produced 174 TWhs of electricity in 2023. 

The electric sector plays a key role in lowering GHG emissions across the rest of the economy. Electri&#64257;cation of other sectors such as transportation and buildings coupled with simultaneous decarbonization of electric generation is a key lever for emissions reductions. To support this transition, we are advocating for public policy supportive of vehicle electrification, investing in enabling infrastructure and technology, and supporting customer education and adoption. We also continue to explore other decarbonization opportunities, supporting pilots of emerging energy technologies and development of clean fuels. 

International Climate Change Agreements. At the international level, the United States is a party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The Parties to the UNFCCC adopted the Paris Agreement at the 21st session of the UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP 21) on December 12, 2015. Under the Agreement, which became effective on November 4, 2016, the parties committed to try to limit the global average temperature increase and to develop national GHG reduction commitments. On November 4, 2020, the United States formally withdrew from the Paris Agreement, retracting its commitment to reduce domestic GHG emissions by 26%-28% by 2025 compared with 2005 levels. However, on January 20, 2021, President Biden accepted the Paris Agreement, which resulted in the United States&#8217; formal re-entry on February 19, 2021. The United States has now set an economy-wide target of reducing its net GHG emissions by 50-52% below 2005 levels by 2030. The 2021 UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP26) and resulting Glasgow Climate Pact indicated important global support for the Paris Agreement and continued progress toward decarbonization. The 2022 UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP27) held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt recommitted countries to their pledges in the Glasgow Climate Pact. In December of 2023, the UNFCCC Conference of Parties (COP28) was held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. One key outcome of COP28 was an agreement for a global "transition away from fossil fuels in energy systems, in a just, orderly, and equitable manner, accelerating action in this critical decade, to achieve net zero by 2050 in keeping with the science." 

Federal Climate Change Legislation. On August 16, 2022, President Biden signed into law the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, which, among other things, includes federal tax credits, certain of which are transferable or fully refundable, for clean energy technologies including existing nuclear plants. The nuclear PTC recognizes the contributions of carbon-free nuclear power by providing a federal tax credit of up to $15 per MWh, subject to phase-out, beginning in 2024 and continuing through 2032. The nuclear PTC includes annual adjustments for inflation. With the nuclear PTC policy support, we expect our nuclear assets will operate through the end of the nuclear PTC period. Further, the IRA includes a 15% book-minimum tax on applicable corporations that we do not expect to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. The U.S. Department of Treasury has begun the process of issuing guidance on the relevant tax provisions included in the legislation but has not yet addressed the nuclear PTC. 

Regulation of GHGs from Power Plants under the Clean Air Act. The EPA&#8217;s 2015 Clean Power Plan (CPP) established regulations addressing carbon dioxide emissions from existing fossil-fired power plants under Clean Air Act Section 111(d). The CPP&#8217;s carbon pollution limits could be met through shifting generation from higher-emitting units to lower- or zero-emitting units. On June 30, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a decision holding that the EPA did not have the authority to require &#8220;generation shifting&#8221; from coal to natural gas and renewables to reduce sector-wide emissions, as it had done in CPP. The remainder of the litigation was remanded to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit and held in abeyance in light of forthcoming actions from the EPA. In May 2023, the EPA proposed new GHG standards for power plants, which is expected to be finalized in 2024. 

State Climate Change Legislation and Regulation. Many states in which we operate have state and regional programs to reduce GHG emissions and renewable and other portfolio standards, which impact the power sector and other sectors as well. 25 states and the District of Columbia have 100% clean energy targets, deep GHG reductions, or both, encompassing 53% of U.S residential electricity customers. See discussion below for additional information on renewable and other portfolio standards. As the nation&#8217;s largest generator of carbon-free electricity, our fleet supports these efforts to produce safe, reliable electricity with minimal GHGs. 

In 2019, New York enacted the Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act, which commits the state to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050, with interim emission reduction and renewable energy requirements in 2030 and 2040. New Jersey&#8217;s Energy Master Plan, released in 2020, provides a comprehensive roadmap for achieving the state&#8217;s goal of a 100% clean energy economy by 2050 and its Global Warming Response Act&#8217;s stated GHG emissions reductions of 80% below 2006 levels by 2050. On September 15, 2021, Illinois Public Act 102-0662 was signed into law by the Governor of Illinois. The Clean Energy Law is designed to achieve 100% carbon-free power by 2045 to enable the state&#8217;s transition to a clean energy economy. The Clean Energy Law establishes decarbonization requirements for Illinois as well as programs to support the retention and development of emissions-free sources of electricity. 

Our nuclear plants are meaningful contributors to the clean energy mix in the states in which they operate. States may not be able to meet their zero-carbon goals without our nuclear plants, as our plants provide a significant portion of the current carbon-free power. Several states in which our nuclear facilities operate have established policies to support nuclear generation. The supportive policies are driven by several factors, including recognition by governments and policy makers that existing nuclear generation facilities are essential to meeting policy objectives on reduction of GHG emissions, the desire to support jobs and regional economies, and the need to ensure reliability and security of the electrical grid through resource diversity. These state-specific policies preserve the environmental attributes of our nuclear facilities, and include the following: 

##TABLE_START Policy Name Year Enacted Nuclear Facilities Impacted Type of Program Year of Expiration New York Clean Energy Standard 2016 FitzPatrick, Ginna, and NMP ZEC 2029 Illinois Zero Emission Standard 2016 Clinton and Quad Cities ZEC 2027 New Jersey Clean Energy Legislation 2018 Salem ZEC 2025 Illinois Clean Energy Law 2021 Byron, Braidwood, and Dresden CMC 2027 ##TABLE_END

Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). The RGGI program requires most fossil fuel-fired power plants in the region to hold allowances, sold at auction or on the secondary market, for each ton of CO2 emissions. Non-emitting resources do not have to purchase or hold these allowances. The following states are participants in RGGI; Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Pennsylvania&#8217;s participation in RGGI is currently being litigated at the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. 

Renewable and Clean Energy Standards. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, 36 states and the District of Columbia, inc l uding most of the states where we operate, have adopted some form of renewable or clean energy procurement requirement. Of these 36 states, eight states have non-enforceable 

renewable energy goals. These standards impose varying levels of mandates for procurement of renewable or clean electricity (the definition of which varies by state) and/or energy efficiency. These are generally expressed as a percentage of annual electric load, often increasing by year. Load serving entities comply with these various requirements through purchasing qualifying renewables, acquiring sufficient certificates (e.g., RECs), paying an alternative compliance payment, and/or a combination of these compliance alternatives. 

While we cannot predict the nature of future regulations or how such regulations might impact future financial statements, we have a low emission portfolio, and GHG restrictions would likely benefit our zero- and low-emission generating units relative to other higher-emission fossil fuel-fired generating units. 

Corporate Clean Energy Targets. Corporations are facing increasing pressure from their customers and investors to align their businesses with international and national environmental and sustainability objectives, including supporting goals to reduce GHG emissions in their business operations. Leading institutional investors and money managers are increasingly considering sustainability as a key factor in investment decisions and are increasingly advocating for more transparency in disclosure on climate-related matters and pledging to align proxy voting to climate-rated proposals with its fiduciary duty. An increasing number of corporations are also proactively making commitments to reducing their GHG emissions footprint, either through procuring increasing amounts of clean energy, such as RECs, EFECs, or emissions offsets, to offset their carbon footprint over time. As the nation&#8217;s largest producer of carbon-free energy, we support taking bold action to address the climate crisis and reestablish leadership in both emerging technologies and existing clean infrastructure that together will power the future. 

Emerging Carbon-Free Technologies. Emerging carbon-free technologies like storage and hydrogen are expected to help accelerate the economy&#8217;s decarbonization. Lower costs, state-directed mandates, a backlog of storage projects in the interconnection queue, and utilities seeking large-scale storage capacity to support higher renewables penetration have created conditions for rapid growth of this technology in the U.S. Clean hydrogen also has the potential to drive decarbonization, particularly as it relates to more challenging sectors like long-haul transportation, steel, chemicals, heating, agriculture, and long-term power storage. Nuclear power can be used to produce clean hydrogen, and our nuclear fleet positions us well to explore this emerging space with supportive policy. Both energy storage and clean hydrogen are expected to help support net-zero carbon goals. 

Climate Change Adaptation 

Our facilities and operations are subject to the global impacts of climate change. Long-term shifts in climactic patterns, such as sustained higher temperatures and sea level rise, may present challenges for our facilities and services. We believe our operations could be significantly affected by the physical risks of climate change. See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS, for additional information. 

We conduct seasonal readiness reviews at our power plants to ensure availability of fuel supplies and equipment performance before entering the summer and winter seasons and we consider and review national climate assessments to inform our longer-term planning. Our nuclear fleet is resilient to weather extremes and generates emissions-free electricity 24 hours a day even during unexpectedly cold winter events and hot summer events. 

Other Environmental Regulation 

Air Quality 

Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS). In 2011, the EPA signed a final rule, known as MATS, to reduce emissions of hazardous air pollutants from power plants. In 2016, in response to a U.S. Supreme Court decision requiring the EPA to consider costs in determining whether it was appropriate and necessary to regulate power plant emissions of hazardous air pollutants, the EPA issued a supplemental finding that, after considering costs, it remained appropriate and necessary. On May 22, 2020, the EPA revoked the "appropriate and necessary" finding underpinning MATS. A lawsuit in the D.C. Circuit sought vacatur of MATS based on the EPA&#8217;s May 22, 2020 finding; on September 11, 2020, the Court granted a motion by Exelon and two other entities to intervene in that lawsuit to defend MATS, and on September 28, 2020, the Court held this portion of the litigation in abeyance. On July 21, 2020, we, as part of Exelon, and two other entities filed a lawsuit in the D.C. Circuit challenging the EPA&#8217;s May 22, 2020 rescission of the &#8220;appropriate and necessary&#8221; finding. In February 2022, the D.C. Circuit granted unopposed motions to substitute Constellation in place of Exelon in these cases. On March 6, 2023, the EPA published a regulation revoking the 2020 revised supplemental finding and reaffirming that it is 

"appropriate and necessary" to regulate hazardous air pollutant emissions from coal- and oil-fired power plants. On July 7, 2023, the D.C. Circuit granted unopposed motions to dismiss all three lawsuits, concluding the MATS litigation. The EPA's March 2023 rule remains in place. 

Good Neighbor Rule. On June 5, 2023, the EPA published a final rule called &#8220;Federal 'Good Neighbor Plan' for the 2015 Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards&#8221; also known as the "Transport Rule". The rule, among other things, establishes nitrogen oxides emissions budgets requiring fossil fuel-fired power plants in 23 states to participate in an allowance-based ozone season trading program beginning in 2023. On February 13, 2023, EPA published a final action fully or partially disapproving state implementation plans submitted by 21 states to address their obligations under the "good neighbor" provisions of the Clean Air Act. However, several Regional Courts of Appeals issued orders staying, pending judicial review, EPA's disapproval of several state plans (including Texas). On September 29, 2023, the EPA issued an interim-final rule clarifying the current scope of applicability of the Federal Plan. A petition for a nationwide stay was denied by the D.C. Circuit and is now pending before the Supreme Court. We cannot reasonably predict the outcome of this litigation. 

Water Quality 

Under the federal Clean Water Act, NPDES permits for discharges into waterways are required to be obtained from the EPA or from the state environmental agency to which the permit program has been delegated, and permits must be renewed periodically. Certain of our facilities discharge water into waterways and are therefore, subject to these regulations and operate under NPDES permits. 

Clean Water Act Section 316(b) is implemented through the NDPES program and requires that the cooling water intake structures at facilities that withdraw more than 2 million gallons of water per day for cooling reflect the best technology available to minimize adverse environmental impacts. Our power generation facilities with cooling water intake systems are subject to the EPA&#8217;s Section 316(b) regulations finalized in 2014; the regulation&#8217;s requirements have been or will be addressed through renewal of these facilities&#8217; NPDES permits. We have completed all required studies and have submitted recommendations for compliance as part of the NPDES/SPDES renewal process. We have submitted the NPDES/SPDES renewal timely for all of our owned and operated nuclear stations. Five of the twelve stations have been deemed compliant with the 316(b) rule using existing technology. Until the compliance requirements are determined by the applicable state permitting director for each of the seven remaining nuclear stations, on a site-specific basis for each plant, we cannot estimate the effect that compliance with the EPA&#8217;s 2014 rule will have on the operation of our generating facilities and our consolidated financial statements. As a result, in some instances, such as Peach Bottom, the permit expiration dates have elapsed and have been administratively extended. Should a state permitting director determine that a facility must install cooling towers to comply with the rule, that facility&#8217;s economic viability could be called into question. However, the final rule does not mandate cooling towers and allows state permitting directors to require alternative, less costly technologies and/or operational measures, based on a site-specific assessment of the feasibility, costs, and benefits of available options. There is no regulatory established timeline for NPDES permit renewals. 

On July 28, 2016, the NJDEP issued a final permit for Salem requiring 316(b) studies and deferring the Agency's selection of a final compliance technology. The permit allows Salem to continue to operate utilizing the existing cooling water intake system with certain required modifications. However, the permit is being challenged by an environmental organization, and if successful, could result in additional costs for Clean Water Act compliance. Potential cooling water system modification costs could be material and could adversely impact the economic competitiveness of this facility. 

Under Clean Water Act Section 404 and state laws and regulations, we may be required to obtain permits for projects involving dredge or fill activities in Waters of the United States. 

Our hydroelectric and nuclear facilities are required to secure a federal license or permit for activities that may result in a discharge to covered waters, we are required to obtain a state water quality certification for those facilities under Clean Water Act section 401. See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the status of the 401 Certification from MDE for Conowingo. 

We are also subject to the jurisdiction of the Delaware River Basin Commission and the Susquehanna River Basin Commission, regional agencies that primarily regulate water usage. 

Solid and Hazardous Waste and Environmental Remediation 

CERCLA authorizes response to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances into the environment. CERCLA authorities complement those of the RCRA, which primarily regulates ongoing hazardous waste handling and disposal. Under CERCLA, generators and transporters of hazardous substances, as well as past and present owners and operators of hazardous waste sites, are strictly, jointly and severally liable for the cleanup costs of hazardous substances at sites, many of which are listed by the EPA on the National Priorities List. These PRPs can be ordered to perform a cleanup, can be sued for costs associated with an EPA-directed cleanup, may voluntarily settle with the EPA concerning their liability for cleanup costs, or may voluntarily begin a site investigation and site remediation under state oversight. Most states have also enacted statutes that contain provisions substantially like CERCLA. Such statutes apply in many states where we currently own or operate, or previously owned or operated facilities, including Illinois, Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, and Texas. In addition, RCRA governs treatment, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes and cleanup of sites where such activities were conducted. 

Our operations have in the past, and may in the future, require substantial expenditures in order to comply with these federal and state environmental laws. Under these laws, we may be liable for the costs of remediating environmental contamination of property now or formerly owned by us and of property contaminated by hazardous substances generated or transported by us. We own or lease several real estate parcels, including parcels on which our operations or the operations of others may have resulted in contamination by substances that are considered hazardous under environmental laws. We are, or could become in the future, parties to proceedings initiated by the EPA, state agencies, and/or other responsible parties under CERCLA and RCRA or similar state laws with respect to several sites or may undertake to investigate and remediate sites for which we may be subject to enforcement actions by an agency or third-party. 

As of December 31, 2023, we have established appropriate contingent liabilities for environmental remediation requirements. In addition, we may be required to make significant additional expenditures not presently determinable for other environmental remediation costs. See Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our environmental matters, remediation efforts, and related impacts to our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Nuclear Waste Storage and Disposal 

There are no facilities for the reprocessing or permanent disposal of SNF currently in operation in the United States, nor has the NRC licensed any such facilities. We currently store all SNF generated by our nuclear generating facilities on-site in storage pools or in dry cask storage facilities. Since our SNF storage pools generally do not have sufficient storage capacity for the life of the respective plant, we have developed dry cask storage facilities to support operations. 

As of December 31, 2023, we had approximately 93,600 SNF assemblies (22,900 tons) stored on site in SNF pools or dry cask storage that includes SNF assemblies at Zion Station, for which we retain ownership and responsibility for the decommissioning of the Zion Independent Spent Fuel Storage Installation. All our nuclear sites have on-site dry cask storage. On-site dry cask storage in concert with on-site storage pools will be capable of meeting all current and future SNF storage requirements at each of our sites for the duration of both current and subsequent license periods of all stations and through decommissioning. For a discussion of matters associated with our contracts with the DOE for the disposal of SNF, see Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 

As a by-product of their operations, nuclear generating units produce LLRW. LLRW is accumulated at each generating station and permanently disposed of at licensed disposal facilities. The Federal Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act of 1980 provides that states may enter into agreements to provide regional disposal facilities for LLRW and restrict use of those facilities to waste generated within the region. Illinois and Kentucky have entered into such an agreement, although neither state currently has an operational site, and none is anticipated to be operational for the next ten years. We ship our Class A LLRW, which represents 93% of LLRW generated at our stations, to disposal facilities in Utah and South Carolina, which have enough storage capacity to store all Class A LLRW for the duration of both current and subsequent license periods for all the stations in our nuclear fleet. The disposal facility in South Carolina at present is only receiving LLRW from LLRW generators in South Carolina, New Jersey (which includes Salem), and Connecticut. 

We utilize on-site storage capacity at all our stations to store and stage for shipping Class B and Class C LLRW. We have a contract through 2040 to ship Class B and Class C LLRW to a disposal facility in Texas. The agreement provides for disposal of all Class B and Class C LLRW currently stored at each station as well as the Class B and Class C LLRW generated during the term of the agreement. However, because the production of LLRW from our nuclear fleet will exceed the capacity at the Texas site (3.9 million curies for 15 years beginning in 2012), we will still be required to utilize on-site storage at our stations for Class B and Class C LLRW. We currently have enough storage capacity to store all Class B and Class C LLRW for the duration of both current and subsequent license periods for of all the stations in our nuclear fleet and, we continue to pursue alternative disposal strategies for LLRW, including an LLRW reduction program to minimize on-site storage and cost impacts. 

Corporate Information 

CEG Parent&#8217;s principal executive office is located at 1310 Point Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21231-3380. Constellation&#8217;s principal executive office is located at 200 Exelon Way, Kennett Square, Pennsylvania 19348-2473. The telephone number for our principal executive offices is (833) 883-0162. We maintain a website located at www.ConstellationEnergy.com. The information contained on, or accessible from, our website is not part of this annual report by reference or otherwise. 

Available Information 

We file our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports with the SEC. You may obtain copies of these documents by accessing the SEC&#8217;s website at www.sec.gov. In addition, as soon as reasonably practicable after such materials are furnished to the SEC, we make copies of these documents available to the public free of charge through our website or by contacting our corporate secretary at the applicable address set forth above under "&#8212;Corporate Information." 

##TABLE_START ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS ##TABLE_END None. 

##TABLE_START 

ITEM 1C. 

CYBERSECURITY 

##TABLE_END

Risk Management and Strategy 

Constellation has established programs and processes to manage material risks from cybersecurity threats including assessing and identifying existing cybersecurity risks, as well as continuously monitoring for developing risks. Our cybersecurity risk management strategy is established at the executive level and is implemented through our cybersecurity program which deploys risk-based security controls and services to protect our customers, personnel, information and cyber assets. The program aligns enterprise cyber and physical security controls with the National Institute of Standards &#38; Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) and other industry standards such as the NERC and NRC cybersecurity standards. Cybersecurity risk is assessed and reported in our enterprise risk management program, which utilizes the Three Lines Model adapted from the Institute of Internal Auditors, for risk management to assign clear risk responsibilities across the enterprise. Through coordination with operational teams, we align on cybersecurity risk classification, categorization, likelihood, and potential impact to the company. At the highest level, our program includes multi-layered oversight by the Board of Directors and Board Committees. 

Our cybersecurity and physical security controls are implemented through policies and procedures which form the comprehensive framework we utilize for planning, performing, managing, assessing, innovating, and improving our security controls. Our defense-in-depth strategy to protect our cyber assets and sensitive information reduces the potential severity and duration of a cybersecurity incident by leveraging security measures across various layers of the enterprise. Cross-functional executive steering committees and peer groups, with business unit and technical stakeholder participation, are maintained to support oversight, security controls development, change management, implementation, evaluation, continuous improvement, and sustainment. 

Our cybersecurity program is aligned to the five functions of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework &#8211; identify, detect, protect, respond, and recover. To protect our information and cyber assets, we implement practices for training and screening of personnel, access management, network defense, asset configuration management, vulnerability assessment (including penetration testing), third-party security, and privacy and information protection. 

In addition, to detect cybersecurity events, we deploy security logging and monitoring, malicious code detection, and data loss protection tools. If the company is the target of a cybersecurity attack, we have established processes for incident response and crisis management to detect and triage potential incidents and determine severity, contain, and eradicate a threat. These processes also include steps to recover our systems and information through established and exercised system recovery plans and business continuity plans. Our incident response process includes steps to notify regulatory and other governmental authorities of cybersecurity events as required by law, including providing notice to investors for material cybersecurity events. 

As part of our process to continuously improve, we utilize internal functions such as our internal audit and risk functions to evaluate security controls and risk management practices. We also engage third-party subject matter experts to independently assess our programs, processes and technical controls, as needed. For our regulated cyber assets associated with critical infrastructure, such as those within the scope of NERC and the NRC, regulatory auditors and inspectors monitor our adherence to mandatory cybersecurity requirements on a regular frequency using a variety of compliance monitoring and enforcement mechanisms. 

Board Governance and Management 

Our Board is actively engaged in monitoring the performance of the Company's cybersecurity program and maintains oversight of the Company&#8217;s enterprise risk program, including with respect to commodity markets, market design, enterprise security (physical and cyber), operating risks, and financial performance. While the full Board retains ultimate responsibility and oversight of the Company's cybersecurity risk management practices, the Nuclear Oversight Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee also have cybersecurity risk management as part of their charters. The Nuclear Oversight Committee is tasked with overseeing compliance with policies and procedures to manage and mitigate cybersecurity risks associated with our nuclear assets. The Audit and Risk Committee oversees policies and processes established by management to identify, assess, monitor, manage and control technology and cyber risks, among other risks. Our Chief Information Officer (CIO) and Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) provide regular reports to the Board, or one or both of its designated Committees, regarding the security of our operational and information technology programs, systems, and risks. We also report on the state of our cybersecurity program and provide key risk indicators to track performance. Emergent matters or events are reported to the Board between scheduled meetings on an ad hoc basis through our incident response and crisis management protocols. 

At the executive and management level, the Chief Administration Officer, via delegations to the Cyber and Physical Security organizations, is authorized to govern and functionally oversee our security controls and services on behalf of the enterprise. Our cybersecurity organization, under the direction of the CISO who reports to the CIO, implements and provides governance and functional oversight for cybersecurity controls and services. Our CIO has over 20 years of experience with information systems, including management roles in operational security, technical design and engineering, and platform architecture cybersecurity, governance and compliance, and business continuity. Our CISO has over 20 years of experience in cybersecurity, governance and compliance, physical security and business continuity. In addition, cybersecurity risk is assessed and tracked through the Company's enterprise risk management program. 

Although the risks from cyber threats have not materially affected our business strategy, results of operations, or financial condition to date, we continue to closely monitor cyber risk. Overall, our company has implemented tactical processes for assessing, identifying, and managing material risks from cybersecurity threats to the company including governance at the Board level and accountability in our executive management for the execution of our cyber risk management strategy and the controls designed to protect our operations. See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS for additional information regarding the Company&#8217;s cybersecurity risks. 

##TABLE_START ITEM 2. PROPERTIES ##TABLE_END

The following table presents our interests in net electric generating capacity by station at December 31, 2023: 

##TABLE_START Station (a) 

Location No. of Units Percent 

Owned (b) 

Primary Fuel Type Primary 

Dispatch 

Type (c) 

Net Generation 

Capacity (MWs) (d) 

Midwest Braidwood Braidwood, IL 2 Uranium Base-load 2,386 Byron Byron, IL 2 Uranium Base-load 2,347 (e) 

LaSalle Seneca, IL 2 Uranium Base-load 2,320 Dresden Morris, IL 2 Uranium Base-load 1,845 (e) 

Quad Cities Cordova, IL 2 75 Uranium Base-load 1,403 Clinton Clinton, IL 1 Uranium Base-load 1,092 Michigan Wind 2 Sanilac Co., MI 50 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 46 Beebe Gratiot Co., MI 34 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 42 Michigan Wind 1 Huron Co., MI 46 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 35 Harvest 2 Huron Co., MI 33 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 30 Harvest Huron Co., MI 31 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 26 Beebe 1B Gratiot Co., MI 21 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 26 CP Windfarm Faribault Co., MN 2 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 2 Clinton Battery Storage Blanchester, OH 1 Energy Storage Peaking 5 Total Midwest 11,605 Mid-Atlantic Limerick Sanatoga, PA 2 Uranium Base-load 2,315 Calvert Cliffs Lusby, MD 2 Uranium Base-load 1,789 Peach Bottom Delta, PA 2 50 Uranium Base-load 1,324 Salem Lower Alloways Creek Township, NJ 2 42.59 Uranium Base-load 995 Conowingo Darlington, MD 11 Hydroelectric Base-load 497 Criterion Oakland, MD 28 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 36 Fair Wind Garrett County, MD 12 Wind Intermittent 30 Fourmile Ridge Garrett County, MD 16 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 20 Solar Horizons Emmitsburg, MD 1 51 (f) 

Solar Intermittent 8 Solar New Jersey 3 Middle Township, NJ 5 51 (f) 

Solar Intermittent 1 Muddy Run Drumore, PA 8 Hydroelectric Intermediate 1,058 Eddystone 3, 4 Eddystone, PA 2 Oil/Gas Peaking 760 (i) 

Perryman Aberdeen, MD 5 Oil/Gas Peaking 404 Croydon West Bristol, PA 8 Oil Peaking 391 Handsome Lake Kennerdell, PA 5 Gas Peaking 268 Richmond Philadelphia, PA 2 Oil Peaking 98 Philadelphia Road Baltimore, MD 4 Oil Peaking 60 Eddystone Eddystone, PA 4 Oil Peaking 60 Delaware Philadelphia, PA 4 Oil Peaking 56 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Station (a) 

Location No. of Units Percent 

Owned (b) 

Primary Fuel Type Primary 

Dispatch 

Type (c) 

Net Generation 

Capacity (MWs) (d) 

Southwark Philadelphia, PA 4 Oil Peaking 52 Falls Morrisville, PA 3 Oil Peaking 51 Moser Lower Pottsgrove Twp., PA 3 Oil Peaking 51 Chester Chester, PA 3 Oil Peaking 39 Schuylkill Philadelphia, PA 2 Oil Peaking 30 Total Mid-Atlantic 10,393 ERCOT South Texas Project Bay City, TX 2 44 Uranium Base-load 1,161 Whitetail Webb County, TX 57 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 47 Sendero Jim Hogg and Zapata County, TX 39 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 40 Colorado Bend II Wharton, TX 3 Gas Intermediate 1,138 Wolf Hollow II Granbury, TX 3 Gas Intermediate 1,103 Handley 3 Fort Worth, TX 1 Gas Intermediate 375 Handley 4, 5 Fort Worth, TX 2 Gas Peaking 870 Total ERCOT 4,734 New York Nine Mile Point Scriba, NY 2 (g) 

Uranium Base-load 1,675 FitzPatrick Scriba, NY 1 Uranium Base-load 842 Ginna Ontario, NY 1 Uranium Base-load 576 Total New York 3,093 Other Antelope Valley Lancaster, CA 1 Solar Intermittent 242 Bluestem Beaver County, OK 60 51 (f)(h) 

Wind Intermittent 101 Shooting Star Kiowa County, KS 65 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 53 Bluegrass Ridge King City, MO 27 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 29 Conception Barnard, MO 24 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 26 Cow Branch Rock Port, MO 24 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 26 Mountain Home Glenns Ferry, ID 20 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 21 High Mesa Elmore Co., ID 19 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 20 Echo 1 Echo, OR 21 50.49 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 17 Sacramento PV Energy Sacramento, CA 4 51 (f) 

Solar Intermittent 15 Cassia Buhl, ID 13 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 14 Wildcat Lovington, NM 13 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 14 Echo 2 Echo, OR 9 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 9 Tuana Springs Hagerman, ID 8 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 9 Greensburg Greensburg, KS 10 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 6 

Threemile Canyon 

Boardman, OR 6 51 (f) 

Wind Intermittent 5 Loess Hills Rock Port, MO 4 Wind Intermittent 5 Denver Airport Solar Denver, CO 1 51 (f) 

Solar Intermittent 2 ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START Station (a) 

Location No. of Units Percent 

Owned (b) 

Primary Fuel Type Primary 

Dispatch 

Type (c) 

Net Generation 

Capacity (MWs) (d) 

Mystic 8, 9 Charlestown, MA 6 Gas Intermediate 1,413 (e) 

Hillabee Alexander City, AL 3 Gas Intermediate 753 Wyman 4 Yarmouth, ME 1 5.9 Oil Intermediate 36 West Medway II West Medway, MA 2 Oil/Gas Peaking 193 West Medway West Medway, MA 3 Oil Peaking 124 Grand Prairie Alberta, Canada 1 Gas Peaking 105 Framingham Framingham, MA 3 Oil Peaking 31 Total Other 3,269 Total 33,094 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) All nuclear stations are boiling water reactors except Braidwood, Byron, Calvert Cliffs, Ginna, Salem, and STP units which are pressurized water reactors. 

(b) 100%, unless otherwise indicated. 

(c) Base-load units are those that normally operate to take all or part of the minimum continuous load of a system and, consequently, produce electricity at an essentially constant rate. Intermittent units are those with output controlled by the natural variability of the energy resource rather than dispatched based on system requirements. Intermediate units are those that normally operate to take load of a system during the daytime higher load hours and, consequently, produce electricity by cycling on and off daily. Peaking units consist of lower-efficiency, quick response steam units, gas turbines and diesels normally used during the maximum load periods. 

(d) Net generation capacity is stated at proportionate ownership share. For nuclear stations, capacity reflects the annual mean rating. Natural gas and oil stations and wind and solar facilities reflect a summer rating. 

(e) On August 9, 2020, we announced we would permanently cease generation operations at Byron and Dresden nuclear stations in 2021 and Mystic Units 8 and 9 in 2024. On September 15, 2021, we reversed the previous decision to retire Byron and Dresden. See Note 7 &#8212; Early Plant Retirements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

(f) Reflects the prior sale of 49% of CRP to a third party. See Note 22 &#8212; Variable Interest Entities of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

(g) We wholly own Nine Mile Point Unit 1 and have an 82% undivided ownership interest in Nine Mile Point Unit 2. 

(h) CRP owns 100% of the Class A membership interests and a tax equity investor owns 100% of the Class B membership interests of the entity that owns the Bluestem generating assets. 

(i) Eddystone stations 3 and 4 will be retiring in June 2025. 

The net generation capability available for operation at any time may be less due to regulatory restrictions, transmission congestion, fuel restrictions, efficiency of cooling facilities, level of water supplies, or generating units being temporarily out of service for inspection, maintenance, refueling, repairs, or modifications required by regulatory authorities. 

We also own EMT, which is a liquefied natural gas (LNG) import facility located on the Mystic River in Everett, MA. EMT connects to two interstate pipeline systems as well as a local gas utility's distribution system and the Mystic Generating Station. 

We maintain property insurance against loss or damage to our principal plants and properties by fire or other perils, subject to certain exceptions. For additional information on insurance specific to our nuclear facilities, see Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For our insured losses, we are self-insured to the extent that any losses are within the policy deductible or exceed the amount of insurance maintained. Any such losses could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations. 

##TABLE_START ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS ##TABLE_END We are parties to various lawsuits and regulatory proceedings in the ordinary course of business. For information regarding material lawsuits and proceedings, see Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters and Note 19 &#8212; Commitments 

and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Such descriptions are incorporated herein by these references. 

##TABLE_START 

Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations:
 Item 7. MANAGEMENT&#8217;S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS ##TABLE_END (Dollars in millions, unless otherwise noted) 

Executive Overview 

We are a supplier of carbon-free energy. Our generating capacity primarily consists of nuclear, wind, solar, natural gas and hydroelectric assets. Through our integrated business operations, we sell electricity, natural gas, and other energy-related products and sustainable solutions to various types of customers, including distribution utilities, municipalities, cooperatives, and commercial, industrial, governmental, and residential customers in competitive markets across multiple geographic regions. We have five reportable segments: Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT and Other Power Regions. The following Management&#8217;s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations summarizes results for the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to the year ended December 31, 2022. For discussion of the year ended December 31, 2022 

compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, refer to ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS in the 2022 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on February 16, 2023. 

Capital Allocation and Growth Announcements 

We are announcing our capital allocation strategy for 2024 and 2025 supporting our core principles outlined in our Strategy and Outlook discussion. See ITEM 1. BUSINESS &#8211; Constellation's Strategy and Outlook for additional information about our strategy. 

We will increase the quarterly dividend by 25% to $0.3525 per share starting in 2024, while targeting growth of 10% annually. We are allocating capital towards our best-in-class generation fleet by committing $875 million of growth capital expenditures over the next two years, including nuclear uprates and license renewals, wind repowering, and hydrogen with policy support. These organic growth opportunities are projected to exceed our double-digit return threshold. In our commitment to return value to shareholders, we have also approved an increase to our previously announced $1 billion share buyback program, authorizing the repurchase of up to an additional $1 billion of company stock. See Note 20 &#8212; Shareholders' Equity of the Combined Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on completed and authorized share buybacks. 

Significant Transactions and Developments 

Separation from Exelon 

On February 21, 2021, Exelon&#8217;s Board of Directors approved a plan to separate its competitive generation and customer-facing energy businesses into a stand-alone publicly traded company (the "separation"). Exelon completed the separation on February 1, 2022. In order to govern the ongoing relationships between us and Exelon after the separation, and to facilitate an orderly transition, we and Exelon have entered into several agreements, including a Separation Agreement, Tax Matters Agreement, a Transition Services Agreement, and an Employee Matters Agreement and other ancillary agreements. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

We incurred separation costs of $101 million and $140 million for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, which are primarily recorded in Operating and maintenance expense. The separation costs are primarily comprised of system-related costs, third-party costs paid to advisors, consultants, lawyers, and other experts assisting in the separation. 

Share Repurchase Program 

On February 16, 2023, our Board of Directors announced a share repurchase program with a $1 billion authority without expiration. Repurchases under this program commenced in March 2023. On December 12, 2023, the Board of Directors approved an increase to our previously announced $1 billion share repurchase program, authorizing the repurchase of up to an additional $1 billion of our outstanding common stock. During 2023, we repurchased from the open market 10.6 million shares of our common stock for a total cost, inclusive of taxes and transaction costs, of $1 billion. See Note 20 &#8212; Shareholders' Equity of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Acquisition of Joint Ownership in South Texas Project 

On November 1, 2023, we completed the acquisition of NRG South Texas LP (renamed and converted as Constellation South Texas, LLC), which owns a 44% undivided ownership interest in the jointly owned STP, a 2,645 MW, dual-unit nuclear plant located in Bay City, Texas. The net cash paid was $1.65 billion, after certain purchase price adjustments. This acquisition is complementary to and aligned strategically with our existing clean energy business operations. See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on this acquisition. The STP operating results are included in the ERCOT operating segment. See Note 5 &#8212; Segment Information additional information on our reportable segments. 

Revenue Recognized for Illinois ZECs Delivered in Prior Planning Years 

Our Clinton and Quad Cities units contract with certain utilities in Illinois which requires delivery of all ZECs produced during each planning year (June 1 to May 31), with total compensation limited by an annual cap for each planning year designed to limit the cost of ZECs to each utility's customers. ZECs delivered that, if paid, would result in the annual cap being exceeded may be paid in subsequent years at the vintage year price as long as the payments would not exceed the annual cap in the year paid. In each planning year since the program commenced on June 1, 2017, we delivered ZECs to the utilities in excess of the annual compensation cap. 

The ZEC price and annual compensation cap effective for each planning year are administratively determined by the IPA. In 2023, we recognized $218 million of revenue as a receivable for ZECs delivered in prior planning years, with payment expected in the third quarter of 2024. As of December 31, 2023, this receivable is included within Customer accounts receivable, net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 4 &#8212; Revenue from Contracts with Customers of the Combined Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on this acquisition. 

Other Key Business Drivers 

Russia and Ukraine Conflict 

We are closely monitoring developments of the Russia and Ukraine conflict including United States, United Kingdom, European Union, and Canadian sanctions, and pending legislation that may impact exports and imports of Russian nuclear fuel supply and enrichment activities, as well as the potential for Russia to limit energy deliveries. To-date, our nuclear fuel deliveries have not been affected by the Russia and Ukraine conflict. Our nuclear fuel is obtained predominantly through long-term uranium supply and service contracts. We work with a diverse set of domestic and international suppliers years in advance to procure our nuclear fuel and generally have enough nuclear fuel to support all our refueling needs for multiple years regardless of sanctions. Recognizing the potential for the continuing conflict to impact our longer-term security and cost of supply, we have entered into contracts to increase the size of our nuclear fuel inventory. We are taking this affirmative action by working with our diverse set of suppliers to ensure we can secure the nuclear fuel needed to continue to operate our nuclear fleet long-term and provide the necessary fuel to bridge potential Russian supply disruption through 2028, which is the date multiple suppliers are expected to have incremental additional capacity online. We are also continuing to work with federal policymakers and other stakeholders to facilitate the expansion of the domestic nuclear fuel cycle within the United States to improve carbon-free energy security. 

Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates 

The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect results of operations and the amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the consolidated financial statements. Management believes that the accounting policies described below require significant judgment in their application or incorporate estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Additional information on the application of these accounting policies can be found in the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Nuclear Decommissioning Asset Retirement Obligations 

The AROs associated with decommissioning our nuclear un its were $13.9 billion at December 31, 2023. The authoritative guidance requires that we estimate our obligation for the future decommissioning of our nuclear generating plants. To estimate that liability, we use an internally-developed, probability-weighted, discounted cash flow model which, on a unit-by-unit basis, considers multiple decommissioning outcome scenarios. 

As a result of nuclear plant retirements in the industry, in recent years, nuclear operators and third-party service providers are obtaining more information about costs associated with decommissioning activities. At the same time, regulators are gaining more information about decommissioning activities which could result in changes to existing decommissioning requirements. In addition, as more nuclear plants are retired, it is possible that technological advances will be identified that could create efficiencies and lead to a reduction in decommissioning costs. The amount of NDT funds could also impact the timing of the decommissioning activities. Additionally, certain factors such as changes in regulatory requirements during plant operations or the profitability of a nuclear plant could impact the timing of plant retirements. These factors could result in material changes to our current estimates as more information becomes available and could change the timing of plant retirements and the probability assigned to the decommissioning outcome scenarios. 

The nuclear decommissioning obligation is adjusted on a regular basis due to the passage of time and revisions to the key assumptions for the expected timing and/or estimated amounts of the future undiscounted cash flows required to decommission the nuclear plants, based upon the following methodologies and significant estimates and assumptions: 

Decommissioning Cost Studies. We use unit-by-unit decommissioning cost studies to provide a marketplace assessment of the expected costs (in current year dollars) and timing of decommissioning activities, which are validated by comparison to current decommissioning projects within the industry and other estimates. Decommissioning cost studies are updated, on a rotational basis, for each of our nuclear units at least every five years, unless circumstances warrant more frequent updates. As part of the annual cost study update process, we evaluate newly assumed costs or substantive changes in previously assumed costs to determine if the cost estimate impacts are sufficiently material to warrant application of the updated estimates to the AROs across the nuclear fleet outside of the normal five-year rotating cost study update cycle. 

Cost Escalation Factors. We use cost escalation factors to escalate the decommissioning costs from the decommissioning cost studies discussed above through the assumed decommissioning period for each of the units. Cost escalation studies, updated on an annual basis, are used to determine escalation factors, and are based on inflation indices for labor, equipment and materials, energy, LLRW disposal, and other costs. All the nuclear AROs are adjusted each year for updated cost escalation factors. 

Probabilistic Cash Flow Models. Our probabilistic cash flow models include the assignment of probabilities to various scenarios for decommissioning cost levels, decommissioning approaches, and timing of plant shutdown on a unit-by-unit basis. Probabilities assigned to cost levels include an assessment of the likelihood of costs 20% higher (high-cost scenario) or 15% lower (low-cost scenario) than the base-cost scenario. The assumed decommissioning scenarios generally include the following three alternatives: (1) DECON, which assumes major decommissioning activities begin shortly after the cessation of operation, (2) Shortened SAFSTOR, which generally assumes a 30-year delay prior to onset of major decommissioning activities, and (3) SAFSTOR, which assumes the nuclear facility is placed and maintained in such condition during decommissioning so that the nuclear facility can be safely stored and subsequently decontaminated within 60 years after cessation of operations. In each decommissioning scenario, spent fuel is transferred to dry cask storage as soon as possible until DOE acceptance for disposal. 

The actual decommissioning approach selected will be determined at the time of shutdown and may be influenced by multiple factors including the funding status of the NDT funds at the time of shutdown and regulatory or other commitments. 

The plant shutdown timing scenarios consider four alternatives: (1) the probability of early plant retirement, (2) the probability of operating through the original 40-year nuclear license term, (3) the probability of operating through an initial 20-year license renewal term, and (4) the probability of a second, 20-year license renewal term. As power market and regulatory environment developments occur, we evaluate and incorporate, as necessary, the impacts of such developments into our nuclear ARO assumptions and estimates. 

Our probabilistic cash flow models also include an assessment of the timing of DOE acceptance of SNF for disposal. We currently assume DOE will begin accepting SNF from the industry in 2035. The SNF acceptance date assumption is based on management&#8217;s estimates of the amount of time required for DOE to select a site location and develop the necessary infrastructure for long-term SNF storage. For additional information regarding SNF, see Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Discount Rates. The probability-weighted estimated future cash flows for the various assumed scenarios are discounted using our specific credit-adjusted, risk-free rates (CARFR) or a AAA-rated U.S. company proxy CARFR for the units that maintain the ability to collect decommissioning costs from utility customers (former PECO and STP units). We initially recognize an ARO at fair value and subsequently adjust it for changes to estimated costs, timing of future cash flows and modifications to decommissioning assumptions. The ARO is not required or permitted to be re-measured for changes in the CARFR that occur in isolation. Increases in the ARO due to upward revisions in estimated undiscounted cash flows are considered new obligations and are measured using a current CARFR as the increase creates a new cost layer within the ARO. Any decrease in the estimated undiscounted future cash flows relating to the ARO are treated as a modification of an existing ARO cost layer and, therefore, are measured using the average historical CARFR rates used in creating the initial ARO cost 

layers. If all our future nominal cash flows associated with the ARO were to be discounted at the current prevailing CARFR, the obligation would decrease from approximately $13.9 billion to approximately $11.3 billion. 

The following table illustrates the significant impact that changes in the CARFR, when combined with changes in projected amounts and expected timing of cash flows, can have on the valuation of the ARO: 

##TABLE_START Change in the CARFR applied to the annual ARO update Increase (Decrease) to ARO as of December 31, 2023 

2022 CARFR rather than the 2023 CARFR 

$ 520 

2023 CARFR increased by 50 basis points 

(290) 

2023 CARFR decreased by 50 basis points 

350 ##TABLE_END

ARO Sensitivities. Changes in the assumptions underlying the ARO could materially affect the decommissioning obligation. The impact of a change in any one of these assumptions to the ARO is highly dependent on how the other assumptions may correspondingly change. 

The following table illustrates the effects of changing certain ARO assumptions while holding all other assumptions constant: 

##TABLE_START Change in ARO Assumption Increase (Decrease) to ARO as of December 31, 2023 Cost escalation studies Uniform increase in escalation rates of 50 basis points $ 1,860 Probabilistic cash flow models Increase the estimated costs to decommission the nuclear plants by 10 percent 770 

Increase the likelihood of the DECON scenario by 10 percent and decrease the likelihood of the SAFSTOR scenario by 10 percent (a) 

Shorten each unit's probability-weighted operating life assumption by 10 percent (b) 

220 Extend the estimated date for DOE acceptance of SNF to 2040 (80) ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Excludes any sites in which management has committed to a specific decommissioning approach. 

(b) Excludes any retired sites. 

See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation and Note 10 &#8212; Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding accounting for nuclear AROs. 

Purchase Accounting 

In accordance with authoritative guidance, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in an acquired business are recorded at their estimated fair values on the date of acquisition. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management&#8217;s judgment, often utilizes independent valuation experts and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives, among other items. Changes to these estimates and assumptions could result in material changes to the fair value of assets and liabilities as of acquisition date. The judgments made in the determination of the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as the estimated useful life of each asset and the duration of each liability, could significantly impact the financial statements in periods after acquisition, such as through depreciation and amortization expense. Authoritative guidance provides that the allocation of the purchase price may be modified up to one year after the acquisition date as more information is obtained about the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

The difference between the purchase price amount and the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill on the balance sheet if the purchase price exceeds the estimated net fair value or as a bargain purchase gain on the income statement if the purchase price is less than the estimated net fair value. Goodwill is assigned to reporting units that are expected to benefit from the acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized, instead it is subject to an impairment assessment at least annually to consider whether the 

reporting unit fair value is more likely than not less than the carrying amount. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation, Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions, and Note 13 &#8212; Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Goodwill 

We are required to perform an assessment for impairment of goodwill at least annually or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting units below their carrying amount. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (known as a component) and is the level at which goodwill is tested for impairment. Our operating segments and reporting units are Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT, and Other Power Regions. See Note 5 &#8212; Segment Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our segments. Goodwill is primarily reported within our ERCOT segment. See Note 13 &#8212; Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Entities assessing goodwill for impairment have the option of first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative assessment is necessary. As part of the qualitative assessment, we evaluate, among other things, management&#8217;s best estimate of projected operating and capital cash flows for the reporting units and changes in certain market conditions, including the discount rate. 

Significant assumptions used in these fair value analyses include discount and growth rates, energy prices, and projected operating and capital cash flows. 

While the 2023 annual assessments indicated no impairments, certain assumptions used in the assessment are highly sensitive to changes. Adverse regulatory actions or changes in significant assumptions could potentially result in future impairments of our goodwill, which could be material. 

See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation, Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions, and Note 13 &#8212; Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Unamortized Energy Contract Assets and Liabilities 

Unamortized energy contract assets and liabilities represent the remaining unamortized balances of non-derivative energy contracts and fuel contracts that we have acquired. The initial amount recorded represents the difference between the fair value of the contracts at the time of acquisition and the contract value based on the terms of each contract. The unamortized energy contract assets and liabilities are amortized over the life of the contract in relation to the expected realization of the underlying cash flows. Amortization of the unamortized energy and fuel contract assets and liabilities are recorded through Operating revenues or Purchased power and fuel expense, depending on the nature of the underlying contract. See Note 13 &#8212; Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Impairment of Long-Lived Assets 

We regularly monitor and evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of those assets may not be recoverable. Indicators of potential impairment may include a deteriorating business climate, including, but not limited to, declines in energy prices, condition of the asset, or plans to dispose of a long-lived asset significantly before the end of its useful life. 

The review of long-lived assets or asset groups for impairment utilizes significant assumptions about operating strategies and estimates of future cash flows, which require assessments of current and projected market conditions. Forecasting future cash flows requires assumptions regarding forecasted commodity prices for the sale of power and purchases of fuel and the expected operations of assets. A variation in the assumptions used could lead to a different conclusion regarding the recoverability of an asset or asset group and, thus, could potentially result in material future impairments. An impairment evaluation is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level at which cash flows of the long-lived assets or asset groups are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. The lowest level of independent cash flows is determined by the evaluation of several factors, including the geographic dispatch of the generation units and the hedging strategies related to those units. The cash flows from our generating units are generally evaluated at a regional portfolio level (asset group) given the interdependency of cash flows generated from the customer supply and 

risk management activities within each region. In certain cases, our generating assets may be evaluated on an individual basis where those assets are contracted on a long-term basis with a third-party and operations are independent of other generating assets (typically contracted renewable generation). 

On a quarterly basis, we assess our long-lived assets or asset groups for indicators of potential impairment. If indicators are present for a long-lived asset or asset group, a comparison of the undiscounted expected future cash flows to the carrying value is performed. When the undiscounted cash flow analysis indicates the carrying value of a long-lived asset or asset group may not be recoverable, the amount of the impairment loss is determined by measuring the excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group over its fair value. The fair value of the long-lived asset or asset group is dependent upon a market participant&#8217;s view of the exit price of the asset or asset groups. This includes significant assumptions of the estimated future cash flows generated by the asset or asset groups and market discount rates. Events and circumstances often do not occur as expected, resulting in differences between prospective financial information and actual results, which may be material. The determination of fair value is driven by both internal assumptions that include significant unobservable inputs, such as revenue and generation forecasts, projected capital, maintenance expenditures, and discount rates, as well as information from various public, financial and industry sources. 

See Note 12 &#8212; Asset Impairments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of asset impairment assessments. 

Depreciable Lives of Property, Plant, and Equipment 

We have significant investments in electric generation assets. These assets are generally depreciated on a straight-line basis, using the group, composite or unitary methods of depreciation. The group approach is typically for groups of similar assets that have approximately the same useful lives and the composite approach is used for heterogeneous assets that have different lives. Under both methods, a reporting entity depreciates the assets over the average life of the assets in the group. The estimation of asset useful lives requires management judgment, supported by formal depreciation studies of historical asset retirement experience. Depreciation studies are generally conducted periodically if an event, regulatory action, or change in retirement patterns indicate an update is necessary. 

Along with depreciation study results, management considers expected future energy market conditions and generation plant operating costs and capital investment requirements in determining the estimated service lives of our generating facilities and reassesses the reasonableness of estimated useful lives whenever events or changes in circumstances warrant. When a determination has been made that an asset will be retired before the end of its current estimated useful life, depreciation provisions will be accelerated to reflect the shortened estimated useful life, which could have a material unfavorable impact on future results of operations. See Note 7 &#8212; Early Plant Retirements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Changes in estimated useful lives of electric generation assets could have a significant impact on future results of operations. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation and Note 8 &#8212; Property, Plant, and Equipment of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding depreciation and estimated service lives of the property, plant and equipment. 

Accounting for Derivative Instruments 

We use derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk, foreign currency exchange risk and interest rate risk related to ongoing business operations. Our derivative activities are in accordance with our Risk Management Policy (RMP). See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

We account for derivative financial instruments under the applicable authoritative guidance. Determining whether a contract qualifies as a derivative requires that management exercise significant judgment, including assessing market liquidity as well as determining whether a contract has one or more underlying and one or more notional quantities. Changes in management&#8217;s assessment of contracts and the liquidity of their markets, and changes in authoritative guidance, could result in previously excluded contracts becoming in scope of new authoritative guidance. 

All derivatives are recognized on the balance sheet at their fair value, except for certain derivatives that qualify for, and are elected under, NPNS. Derivatives entered for economic hedging and for proprietary trading purposes are recorded at fair value through earnings. NPNS transactions are not required to be recorded at fair value, but rather on an accrual basis of accounting. Determining whether a contract qualifies for NPNS requires judgment on whether the contract will physically deliver and requires that management ensure compliance with all associated qualification and documentation requirements. 

Commodity Contracts. Identification of a commodity contract as an economic hedge requires us to determine that the contract is in accordance with the RMP. We reassess our economic hedges on a regular basis to determine if they continue to be within the guidelines of the RMP. 

As a part of the authoritative guidance, we make estimates and assumptions concerning future commodity prices, load requirements, interest rates, the timing of future transactions and their probable cash flows, the fair value of contracts and the expected changes in the fair value in deciding whether to enter derivative transactions, and in determining the initial accounting treatment for derivative transactions. Under the authoritative guidance for fair value measurements, we categorize these derivatives under a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. 

Derivative contracts are traded in both exchange-based and non-exchange-based markets. Exchange-based derivatives that are valued using unadjusted quoted prices in active markets are generally categorized in Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. 

Certain derivative pricing is verified using indicative price quotations available through brokers or over-the-counter, online exchanges. The price quotations reflect the average of the mid-point of the bid-ask spread from observable markets that we believe provide the most liquid market for the commodity. The price quotations are reviewed and corroborated to ensure the prices are observable and representative of an orderly transaction between market participants. Our derivatives are traded predominantly at liquid trading points. The remaining derivative contracts are valued using models that consider inputs such as contract terms, including maturity, and market parameters, and assumptions of the future prices of commodities, interest rates, volatility, credit worthiness and credit spread. For derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps, and options, the model inputs are generally observable. Such instruments are categorized in Level 2. 

For derivatives that trade in less liquid markets with limited pricing information, the model inputs generally would include both observable and unobservable inputs and are categorized in Level 3. 

We consider non-performance risk, including credit risk in the valuation of derivative contracts, and both historical and current market data in our assessment of non-performance risk. The impacts of non-performance and credit risk to date have generally not been material to the consolidated financial statements. 

See ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK and Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments and Note 18 &#8212; Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding derivative instruments. 

Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefits 

The majority of our current employees participate in defined benefit pension and OPEB plans we sponsor. The measurement of the plan obligations and costs of providing benefits involves various factors, including the development of valuation assumptions and inputs and accounting policy elections. When developing the required assumptions, we consider historical information as well as future expectations. The measurement of projected benefit obligations and costs is affected by several assumptions including the discount rate, the long-term expected rate of return on plan assets, the anticipated rate of increase of health care costs, our contributions, the rate of compensation increases, and the long-term expected investment rate credited to employees of certain plans, among others. The assumptions are updated annually and upon any interim remeasurement of the plan obligations. 

Pension and OPEB plan assets include equity securities, including U.S. and international securities, and fixed income securities, as well as certain alternative investment classes such as real estate, private equity, private credit, and hedge funds. 

Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets. In determining the EROA, we consider expectations regarding future long-term capital market performance, weighted by our target asset class allocations. We calculate the amount of expected return on pension and OPEB plan assets by multiplying the EROA by the MRV of plan assets at the beginning of the year, taking into consideration anticipated contributions and benefit payments to be made during the year. In determining MRV, the authoritative guidance for pensions and postretirement benefits allows the use of either fair value or a calculated value that recognizes changes in fair value in a systematic and rational manner over not more than five years. For the majority of pension plan assets, we use a calculated value that adjusts for 20% of the difference between fair value and expected MRV of plan assets. Use of this calculated value approach enables less volatile expected asset returns to be recognized as a component of pension cost from year to year. For OPEB plan assets and certain pension plan assets, we use fair value to calculate the MRV. 

Discount Rate. The discount rates are determined by developing a spot rate curve based on the yield to maturity of a universe of high-quality non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds with similar maturities to the related pension and OPEB obligations. The spot rates are used to discount the estimated future benefit distribution amounts under the pension and OPEB plans. The discount rate is the single level rate that produces the same result as the spot rate curve. We utilize an analytical tool developed by our actuaries to determine the discount rates. 

Mortality. The mortality assumption is composed of a base table that represents the current expectation of life expectancy of the population adjusted by an improvement scale that attempts to anticipate future improvements in life expectancy. At separation and upon remeasurement as of December 31, 2023, we utilized the mortality tables and projection scales released by the SOA. 

Sensitivity to Changes in Key Assumptions. The following table illustrates the effects of changing certain of the actuarial assumptions reflected above and as discussed in Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, while holding all other assumptions constant: 

##TABLE_START Actual Assumption Pension OPEB Assumption Increase / (Decrease) Actuarial Assumption Pension OPEB Total 

Change in 2024 cost: 

Discount rate (a) 

5.52 % 5.50 % 0.5 % $ (14) $ &#8212; $ (14) 5.52 % 5.50 % (0.5) % 14 1 15 EROA 6.50 % 6.51 % 0.5 % (39) (4) (43) 6.50 % 6.51 % (0.5) % 39 4 43 Change in benefit obligation: Discount rate (a) 

5.17 % 5.15 % 0.5 % (349) (64) (413) 5.17 % 5.15 % (0.5) % 380 69 449 ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) In general, the discount rate will have a larger impact on the pension and OPEB cost and obligation as the rate moves closer to 0%. Therefore, the discount rate sensitivities above cannot necessarily be extrapolated for larger increases or decreases in the discount rate. Additionally, we utilize a liability-driven hedging investment strategy for our pension asset portfolio. The sensitivities shown above do not reflect the offsetting impact that changes in discount rates may have on pension asset returns. 

See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation and Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the accounting for the defined benefit pension and OPEB plans. 

Taxation 

Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken, as well as deferred tax assets and liabilities and valuation allowances. We account for uncertain income tax positions using a benefit recognition model with a two-step approach including a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold and a measurement approach based on the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management evaluates each position based solely on the technical merits and facts and circumstances of the position, assuming the 

position will be examined by a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required to determine whether the recognition threshold has been met and, if so, the appropriate amount of tax benefits to be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. 

We evaluate quarterly the probability of realizing deferred tax assets by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and our intent and ability to implement tax planning strategies, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. We also assess negative evidence, such as the expiration of historical operating loss or tax credit carryforwards, that could indicate our inability to realize our deferred tax assets. Based on the combined assessment, we record valuation allowances for deferred tax assets when it is more-likely-than-not such benefit will not be realized in future periods. 

Actual income taxes could vary from estimated amounts due to the future impacts of various items, including future changes in income tax laws, our forecasted financial condition and results of operations, failure to successfully implement tax planning strategies, as well as results of audits and examinations of filed tax returns by taxing authorities. See Note 14 &#8212; Income Taxes of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Accounting for Loss Contingencies 

In the preparation of our financial statements, we make judgments regarding the future outcome of contingent events and record liabilities for loss contingencies that are probable and can be reasonably estimated based upon available information. The amount recorded may differ from the actual expense incurred when the uncertainty is resolved. Such difference could have a significant impact in the consolidated financial statements. 

Environmental Costs. Environmental investigation and remediation liabilities are based upon estimates with respect to the number of sites for which we will be responsible, the scope and cost of work to be performed at each site, the portion of costs that will be shared with other parties, the timing of the remediation work, regulations, and the requirements of local governmental authorities. In addition, periodic reviews are performed to assess the adequacy of other environmental reserves. These matters, if resolved in a manner different from the estimate, could have a significant impact in the consolidated financial statements. See Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Other, Including Personal Injury Claims. Prior to our separation from Exelon, we were self-insured for general liability, automotive liability, and workers&#8217; compensation claims. For accidents occurring post-separation, we maintain insurance coverage for general liability, automotive liability, workers&#8217; compensation, and personal injury claims and are self-insured to the extent that losses are within policy deductibles or exceed the amount of insurance maintained. We have reserves for both open claims asserted, and an estimate of claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). The IBNR reserve is estimated based on actuarial assumptions and analysis and is updated annually. Future events, such as the number of new claims to be filed each year, the average cost of disposing of claims, as well as the numerous uncertainties surrounding litigation and possible state and national legislative measures could cause the actual costs to be higher or lower than estimated. Accordingly, these claims, if resolved in a manner different from the estimate, could have a material impact to the consolidated financial statements. 

Revenue Recognition 

Sources of Revenue and Determination of Accounting Treatment. We earn revenue from various business activities including competitive sales of power, natural gas, and other energy-related products and sustainable solutions. 

The accounting treatment for revenue recognition is based on the nature of the underlying transaction and applicable authoritative guidance. We primarily apply the Revenue from Contracts with Customers and Derivatives Revenues guidance to recognize revenue, as discussed in more detail below. 

Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We recognize revenues in the period in which the performance obligations within contracts with customers are satisfied, which generally occurs when power, natural gas and other energy-related commodities and services are provided to the customer. Transactions within the scope of 

Revenue from Contracts with Customers generally include non-derivative agreements, contracts that are designated as NPNS and spot-market energy commodity sales, including settlements with RTOs and ISOs. 

The determination of our retail power and natural gas sales to individual customers is based on systematic readings of customer meters, generally monthly. Energy delivered to customers that has not yet been billed as of the reporting period is estimated and corresponding unbilled revenue is recorded. The measurement of unbilled revenue is based upon individual customer meter readings, forecasted volumes, and applicable rates. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation and Note 4 &#8212; Revenue from Contracts with Customers of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Derivative Revenues. We record revenues and expenses using the mark-to-market method of accounting for transactions that are accounted for as derivatives. These derivative transactions primarily relate to commodity price risk management activities. Mark-to-market revenues and expenses include inception gains or losses on new transactions where the fair value is observable, unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of open contracts, and realized gains and losses. 

Financial Results of Operations 

GAAP Results of Operations. The following table sets forth our GAAP consolidated Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Common Shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022. For additional information regarding the financial results for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022 see the discussions of Results of Operations below. 

##TABLE_START For the Years Ended December 31, Favorable Variance 2023 2022 

GAAP Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Common Shareholders 

$ 1,623 $ (160) $ 1,783 ##TABLE_END

Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP). In analyzing and planning for our business, we supplement our use of GAAP Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Common Shareholders with Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) as a performance measure. Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) reflects an additional way of viewing our business that, when viewed with our GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliation to GAAP Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Common Shareholders included in the table below, may provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) should not be relied upon to the exclusion of GAAP financial measures and is, by definition, an incomplete understanding of our business, and must be considered in conjunction with GAAP measures. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) is neither a standardized financial measure, nor a presentation defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to other companies&#8217; presentations or deemed more useful than the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this report. 

The following table provides a reconciliation between Net income (loss) attributable to common shareholders as determined in accordance with GAAP and Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) for the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022. 

##TABLE_START For the Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Common Shareholders $ 1,623 $ (160) 

Income Tax (Benefit) Expense (a) 

840 (339) Depreciation and Amortization 1,096 1,091 Interest Expense, Net 431 251 

Unrealized (Gain) Loss on Fair Value Adjustments (b) 

658 1,058 Asset Impairments 71 &#8212; Plant Retirements and Divestitures (28) (11) 

Decommissioning-Related Activities (c) 

(716) 820 Pension &#38; OPEB Non-Service Credits (54) (116) 

Separation Costs (d) 

101 140 Acquisition-Related Costs 12 &#8212; 

ERP System Implementation Costs (e) 

25 22 Change in Environmental Liabilities 43 10 

Prior Merger Commitment (f) 

&#8212; (50) 

Noncontrolling Interests (g) 

(77) (49) Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) $ 4,025 $ 2,667 ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) Includes amounts contractually owed to Exelon under the TMA reflected in Other, net. 

(b) Includes mark-to-market on economic hedges and fair value adjustments related to gas imbalances and equity investments. 

(c) Reflects all gains and losses associated with NDTs, ARO accretion, ARO remeasurement, and impacts of contractual offset for Regulatory Agreement Units. 

(d) Represents certain incremental costs related to the separation (system-related costs, third-party costs paid to advisors, consultants, lawyers, and other experts assisting in the separation), including a portion of the amounts billed to us pursuant to the TSA. 

(e) Reflects costs related to a multi-year ERP system implementation. 

(f) Reversal of a charge related to a 2012 merger commitment. 

(g) Represents elimination from results for the noncontrolling interests related to certain adjustments. 

Results of Operations 

##TABLE_START 2023 2022 Favorable (Unfavorable) Variance Operating revenues $ 24,918 $ 24,440 $ 478 Operating expenses Purchased power and fuel 16,001 17,462 1,461 Operating and maintenance 5,685 4,841 (844) Depreciation and amortization 1,096 1,091 (5) Taxes other than income taxes 553 552 (1) Total operating expenses 23,335 23,946 611 

Gain (loss) on sales of assets and businesses 

27 1 26 

Operating income (loss) 

1,610 495 1,115 Other income and (deductions) Interest expense, net (431) (251) (180) Other, net 1,268 (786) 2,054 Total other income and (deductions) 837 (1,037) 1,874 Income (loss) before income taxes 2,447 (542) 2,989 

Income tax (benefit) expense 

859 (388) (1,247) Equity in income (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates (11) (13) 2 Net income (loss) 1,577 (167) 1,744 

Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests 

(46) (7) (39) Net income (loss) attributable to common shareholders $ 1,623 $ (160) $ 1,783 ##TABLE_END

Year Ended December 31, 2023 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2022. Net income (loss) attributable to common shareholders was favorable by $1,783 million primarily due to: 

&#8226; Favorable market and portfolio conditions primarily driven by higher realized margins on load contracts and generation-to-load optimization; 

&#8226; Favorable net realized and unrealized NDT activity; and 

&#8226; Unrealized gains resulting from an investment that became a publicly traded company in the second quarter of 2023. 

The favorable items were partially offset by: 

&#8226; Higher labor, contracting and materials; 

&#8226; Lower capacity revenues; 

&#8226; Impact of our annual update to the nuclear ARO for Non-Regulatory Agreement Units; 

&#8226; Unfavorable impacts of nuclear outages; and 

&#8226; Higher interest expense. 

Operating revenues. The basis for our reportable segments is the integrated management of our electricity business that is located in different geographic regions, and largely representative of the footprints of RTO/ISO and/or NERC regions, which utilize multiple supply sources to provide electricity through various distribution channels (wholesale and retail). Our hedging strategies and risk metrics are also aligned with these same geographic regions. Our five reportable segments are Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT, and Other Power Regions. See Note 5 &#8212; Segment Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these reportable segments. 

Wholesale and retail sales of natural gas, as well as sales of other energy-related products and sustainable solutions and other miscellaneous business activities that are not significant to overall results of operations are reported under Other and not allocated to a region. 

For the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to 2022, Operating revenues were as follows: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 2023 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Mid-Atlantic $ 5,138 $ 5,164 $ (26) (0.5) % Midwest 4,658 4,650 8 0.2 % New York 2,021 1,595 426 26.7 % ERCOT 1,346 1,543 (197) (12.8) % Other Power Regions 5,851 6,732 (881) (13.1) % 

Total reportable segment electric revenues 

19,014 19,684 (670) (3.4) % Other 4,505 5,944 (1,439) (24.2) % 

Mark-to-market gains (losses) 

1,399 (1,188) 2,587 Total Operating revenues $ 24,918 $ 24,440 $ 478 2.0 % ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) % Change in mark-to-market is not a meaningful measure. 

Sales and Supply Sources. Our sales and supply sources by region are summarized below: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Supply Source (GWhs) 2023 2022 Variance % Change 

Nuclear Generation (a) 

Mid-Atlantic 53,012 53,214 (202) (0.4) % Midwest 93,768 95,090 (1,322) (1.4) % New York 

25,546 25,046 500 2.0 % ERCOT 1,721 &#8212; 1,721 100.0 % Total Nuclear Generation 174,047 173,350 697 0.4 % Natural Gas, Oil and Renewables Mid-Atlantic 2,014 2,097 (83) (4.0) % Midwest 1,024 1,202 (178) (14.8) % ERCOT 16,877 14,124 2,753 19.5 % Other Power Regions 8,512 10,189 (1,677) (16.5) % Total Natural Gas, Oil and Renewables 28,427 27,612 815 3.0 % Purchased Power Mid-Atlantic 

16,509 15,366 1,143 7.4 % Midwest 984 610 374 61.3 % ERCOT 5,530 3,575 1,955 54.7 % Other Power Regions 44,192 51,131 (6,939) (13.6) % Total Purchased Power 67,215 70,682 (3,467) (4.9) % Total Supply/Sales by Region Mid-Atlantic 71,535 70,677 858 1.2 % Midwest 95,776 96,902 (1,126) (1.2) % New York 

25,546 25,046 500 2.0 % ERCOT 24,128 17,699 6,429 36.3 % Other Power Regions 52,704 61,320 (8,616) (14.1) % Total Supply/Sales by Region 269,689 271,644 (1,955) (0.7) % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Includes the proportionate share of output where we have an undivided ownership interest in jointly-owned generating plants. 

Nuclear Fleet Capacity Factor. The following table presents nuclear fleet operating data for our plants, which reflects ownership percentage of stations operated by us, excluding Salem and STP, which are operated by PSEG and STPNOC, respectively. The nuclear fleet capacity factor presented in the table is defined as the ratio of the actual output of a plant over a period of time to its output if the plant had operated at its net monthly mean capacity for that time period. We consider capacity factor to be a useful measure to analyze the nuclear fleet performance between periods. We have included the analysis below as a complement to the financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. However, these measures are not a presentation defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to other companies&#8217; presentations or be more useful than the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this report. 

##TABLE_START 2023 2022 Nuclear fleet capacity factor 94.4 % 94.8 % Refueling outage days 256 212 Non-refueling outage days 51 54 ##TABLE_END

ZEC Prices. We are compensated through state programs for the carbon-free attributes of our nuclear generation. ZEC programs are a significant contributor to our total operating revenues. The following table includes the average ZEC reference prices ($/MWh) for each of our major regions in which state programs have been enacted. Prices reflect the weighted average price for the various delivery periods within the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022. 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 

State (Region) (a) 

2023 2022 Variance % Change 

New Jersey (Mid-Atlantic) (b) 

$ 9.95 $ 9.93 $ 0.02 0.2 % 

Illinois (Midwest) (c) 

5.18 13.88 (8.70) (62.7) % New York (New York) 19.05 21.38 (2.33) (10.9) % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) See ITEM 1. BUSINESS, Environmental Matters for additional information on the plants receiving payments through state programs. 

(b) The ZEC price is expected to be $10.00/MWh for each delivery period and is subject to an annual update once full year generation is known. Following the latest annual update, on August 16, 2023 the ZEC price for the delivery period beginning June 1, 2022 through May 31, 2023 was calculated to be $9.88. 

(c) See Note 4 &#8212; Revenue from Contracts with Customers of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Illinois ZEC program. 

Illinois CMC Price. The price received (paid) for each CMC is determined by the IPA monthly and is based on the accepted CMC bid, less the sum of (a) monthly weighted average PJM busbar price, (b) ComEd zone capacity price and (c) any federal tax credit or subsidy received, and is subject to a customer protection cap ($30.30 per MWh for initial delivery period June 1, 2022 through May 31, 2023 and $32.50 per MWh for the period June 1, 2023 through May 31, 2024). If the monthly CMC price per MWh calculation results in a net positive value, ComEd will multiply that value by the delivered quantity and pay the total to us. If the CMC price per MWh calculation results in a net negative value, we will multiply this value by the delivered quantity and pay the net value to ComEd. The average CMC prices per MWh were $4.13 and ($42.20) for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. 

Capacity Prices. We participate in capacity auctions in each of our major regions, except ERCOT which does not have a capacity market. We also incur capacity costs associated with load served, which are factored into customer sales prices. Capacity prices have a significant impact on our operating revenues and purchased power and fuel expense. We report capacity on a net monthly basis within each region in either Operating revenues or Purchased power and fuel expense, depending on our net monthly position. The following table presents the average capacity prices ($/MW Day) for each of our major regions. Prices reflect the weighted average price for the various auction periods within the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022. 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Location (Region) 2023 2022 Variance % Change Eastern Mid-Atlantic Area Council (Mid-Atlantic and Midwest) $ 69.64 $ 126.14 $ (56.50) (44.8) % ComEd (Midwest) 48.64 121.71 (73.07) (60.0) % Rest of State (New York) 137.88 85.36 52.52 61.5 % Southeast New England (Other) 91.67 138.21 (46.54) (33.7) % ##TABLE_END

Electricity Prices. As a producer and supplier of electricity, the price of electricity has a significant impact on our operating revenues and purchased power cost. We report the sale and purchase of electricity in the spot market on a net hourly basis in either Operating revenues or Purchased power and fuel expense within each region, depending on our net hourly position. The price of electricity is impacted by several variables, including but not limited to, the price of fuels, generation resources in the region, weather, on-going competition, emerging technologies, as well as macroeconomic and regulatory factors. The following table presents an average day-ahead around-the-clock reference price ($/MWh) for the periods presented for each of our major regions and does not necessarily reflect prices we ultimately realized. 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Location (Region) 2023 2022 Variance % Change PJM West (Mid-Atlantic) $ 33.06 $ 72.90 $ (39.84) (54.7) % ComEd (Midwest) 26.64 60.24 (33.60) (55.8) % Central (New York) 26.97 57.52 (30.55) (53.1) % North (ERCOT) 55.15 64.38 (9.23) (14.3) % 

Southeast Massachusetts (Other) (a) 

37.35 86.02 (48.67) (56.6) % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Reflects New England, which comprises the majority of the activity in the Other region. 

For the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to 2022, changes in Operating revenues by region were approximately as follows: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Description Mid-Atlantic $ (26) (0.5) % 

&#8226; unfavorable settled economic hedges of ($305) due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#8226; unfavorable retail load revenue of ($40) primarily due to lower contracted energy prices; partially offset by 

&#160;&#8226; favorable wholesale load revenue of $250 due to higher contracted energy prices and higher volumes 

&#160;&#8226; favorable PJM net performance bonuses of $45 associated with the December 2022 weather event (b) 

Midwest 8 0.2 % 

&#8226; favorable settled economic hedges of $210 due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#160;&#8226; favorable ZEC revenue of $85 primarily due to revenue recognized for Illinois ZECs delivered in prior 

planning years partially offset by a decrease in the ZEC price in current planning year 

&#8226; favorable retail load revenue of $25 primarily due to higher load volumes, partially offset by lower contracted energy prices; partially offset by 

&#8226; unfavorable net generation and wholesale load revenue of ($280) primarily due to lower nuclear generation and lower load volumes, partially offset by CMC program activity and net capacity revenue 

&#160;&#8226; unfavorable PJM performance bonuses of ($40), associated with the December 2022 weather event (b) , 

##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Description New York 426 26.7 % 

&#160;&#8226; favorable settled economic hedges of $520 due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#8226; favorable retail load revenue of $105 primarily due to higher contracted energy prices; partially offset by 

&#8226; unfavorable net generation revenue of ($150) primarily due to lower energy prices 

&#8226; unfavorable ZEC revenue of ($50) primarily due to lower ZEC price partially offset by higher generation volumes 

ERCOT (197) (12.8) % 

&#160;&#8226; unfavorable settled economic hedges of ($570) due to settled prices relative to hedged prices; partially offset by 

&#8226; favorable wholesale load revenue of $330 due to higher volumes and higher contracted energy prices 

Other Power Regions (881) (13.1) % 

&#8226; unfavorable settled economic hedges of ($845) due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#8226; unfavorable wholesale load revenue of ($190) primarily due to lower volumes; partially offset by 

&#8226; favorable retail load revenue of $175 primarily due to higher contracted energy prices 

Other (1,439) (24.2) % 

&#160;&#8226; unfavorable gas revenue, including settled economic hedges, of ($1,240) primarily due to lower gas prices 

&#8226; unfavorable revenues in the United Kingdom of ($225) primarily due to lower energy prices 

Mark-to-market (c) 

2,587 

&#8226; gains on economic hedging activities of $1,399 in 2023 compared to losses of ($1,188) in 2022 

Total $ 478 2.0 % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) % Change in mark-to-market is not a meaningful measure. 

(b) See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on PJM performance bonuses 

(c) See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on mark-to-market gains and losses. 

Purchased power and fuel. See Operating revenues above for discussion of our reportable segments and hedging strategies and for supplemental statistical data, including supply sources by region, nuclear fleet capacity factor, capacity prices, and electricity prices. 

The following business activities are not allocated to a region and are reported under Other: wholesale and retail sales of natural gas, as well as other miscellaneous business activities that are not significant to overall results of operations. 

For the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to 2022, Purchased power and fuel expense were as follows: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 2023 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Mid-Atlantic $ 2,214 $ 3,026 $ 812 26.8 % Midwest 1,403 1,886 483 25.6 % New York 770 528 (242) (45.8) % ERCOT 764 1,136 372 32.7 % Other Power Regions 4,611 5,811 1,200 20.7 % Total electric purchased power and fuel 9,762 12,387 2,625 21.2 % Other 3,868 5,250 1,382 26.3 % 

Mark-to-market losses (gains) 

2,371 (175) (2,546) Total purchased power and fuel $ 16,001 $ 17,462 $ 1,461 8.4 % ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) % Change in mark-to-market is not a meaningful measure. 

For the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to 2022, changes in Purchased power and fuel expense by region were approximately as follows: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Description Mid-Atlantic $ 812 26.8 % 

&#8226; favorable purchased power and net capacity impact of $960 primarily due to lower energy and capacity prices; partially offset by 

&#8226; unfavorable environmental products activity of ($160) primarily due to higher load served and REC prices 

Midwest 483 25.6 % 

&#8226; favorable cost associated with power delivery and net capacity impact of $525 primarily due to lower energy and capacity prices earned 

New York (242) (45.8) % 

&#160;&#8226; unfavorable settlement of economic hedges of ($360) due to settled prices relative to hedged prices; partially offset by 

&#8226; favorable cost associated with power delivery and net capacity impact of $130 primarily due to lower energy prices and partially offset by higher capacity prices 

ERCOT 372 32.7 % 

&#8226; favorable settlement of economic hedges of $245 due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#8226; favorable fuel cost of $70 primarily due to lower gas prices partially offset by higher generation 

&#8226; favorable purchased power of $65 primarily due to lower energy prices and higher generation partially offset by higher load served 

Other Power Regions 1,200 20.7 % 

&#160;&#8226; favorable purchased power and fuel of $3,235 primarily due to lower energy prices and lower load served; partially offset by 

&#8226; unfavorable settlement of economic hedges of ($1,965) due to settled prices relative to hedged prices 

&#8226; unfavorable environmental products activity of ($55) primarily driven higher REC prices 

##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Variance % Change (a) 

Description Other 1,382 26.3 % 

&#160;&#8226; favorable net gas purchase costs and settlement of economic hedges of $1,160 primarily due to lower gas 

prices 

&#8226; favorable purchases in the United Kingdom of $180 primarily due to lower energy prices 

&#8226; favorable fair value adjustment related to gas imbalances of $45 

Mark-to-market (b) 

(2,546) 

&#8226; losses on economic hedging activities of ($2,371) in 2023 compared to gains of $175 in 2022 

Total $ 1,461 8.4 % ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) % Change in mark-to-market is not a meaningful measure. 

(b) See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on mark-to-market gains and losses. 

The changes in Operating and maintenance expense consisted of the following: 

##TABLE_START 2023 vs. 2022 Increase (Decrease) 

Labor, other benefits, contracting, and materials (a) 

$ 349 

Decommissioning-related activities (b) 

169 Nuclear refueling outage costs, including the co-owned Salem plants 157 Asset impairments 71 

Prior merger commitment 

50 Change in environmental liabilities 34 Other 14 Total increase $ 844 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Primarily reflects increased employee-related costs, including labor and other incentives, and certain non-essential maintenance work. 

(b) Primarily reflects a decreased benefit related to the annual nuclear ARO update for non-regulatory agreement units. 

Interest expense, net increased for the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the issuance of senior notes and tax exempt bonds, increased fees and interest on short term borrowings, and changes in the 13-week Treasury rate for our SNF obligation. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our senior notes, tax-exempt bonds, and short-term borrowings. See Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our SNF obligation. 

Other, net was favorable for the year ended December 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022, due to activity described in the table below: 

##TABLE_START Other, net For the Years Ended December 31, Income (Deductions) Income (Deductions) 2023 2022 

Decommissioning-related activities (a) 

$ 803 $ (902) 

Non-service net periodic benefit credit (cost) (b) 

54 110 

Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) from equity investments (c) 

307 (13) 

Return to provision adjustment (d) 

19 (49) 

Other (e) 

85 68 Other, net $ 1,268 $ (786) ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) Includes net realized and net unrealized gains (losses) on NDT fund investments, the elimination of decommissioning-related activities, and the elimination of income taxes related to all NDT fund activity for the Regulatory Agreement Units except for decommissioning-related impacts that were not offset for the Byron units starting in the second quarter of 2021. With our September 15, 2021 reversal of the previous decision to retire Byron, we resumed contractual offset for Byron as of that date. See Note 10 &#8212; Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the accounting for nuclear decommissioning and the contractual offset suspension for the Byron units. See Note 23 &#8212; Supplemental Financial Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

(b) Prior to separation, we were allocated our portion of pension and OPEB non-service credits (costs) from Exelon, which was included in Operating and maintenance expense. Effective February 1, 2022, the non-service credit (cost) components are included in Other, net, in accordance with single employer plan accounting. See Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

(c) For 2023, includes unrealized gain resulting from equity investment that became publicly traded in the second quarter of 2023 and now has a readily determinable fair value (and no longer is accounted for as an equity method investment due to lack of significant influence). We record the fair value of this investment in Investments on the Consolidated Balance Sheets based on quoted market price of the stock. See Note 18 &#8212; Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. For 2022, represents Net realized and unrealized (losses) gains from equity investments. 

(d) This reflects amounts contractually owed to Exelon under the TMA, which is offset in Income taxes. See Note 14 &#8212; Income Taxes of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

(e) Includes amounts we billed Exelon for services pursuant to the TSA. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Effective income tax rates were 35.1% and 71.6% for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. We do not expect the effective tax rate to deviate from the statutory tax rate with the exception of realized and unrealized gains and losses of the nuclear decommissioning trust funds. In 2022, the rate was also impacted by one-time adjustments. See Note 14 &#8212; Income Taxes of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests primarily relates to CRP for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022. 

Liquidity and Capital Resources 

For discussion of the year ended December 31, 2022 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources of MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS in the 2022 Form 10-K which was filed with the SEC on February 16, 2023. 

All results included throughout the liquidity and capital resources section are presented on a GAAP basis. 

Our operating and capital expenditures requirements are provided by internally generated cash flows from operations, the sale of certain receivables, as well as funds from external sources in the capital markets and through bank borrowings. Our business is capital intensive and requires considerable capital resources. We 

annually evaluate our financing plan and credit line sizing, focusing on maintaining our investment grade ratings while meeting our cash needs to fund capital requirements, including construction expenditures, retire debt, pay dividends, fund pension and OPEB obligations, and invest in new and existing ventures. A broad spectrum of financing alternatives beyond the core financing options can be used to meet our needs and fund growth including monetizing assets in the portfolio via project financing, asset sales, and the use of other financing structures (e.g., joint ventures, minority partners, etc.). Our access to external financing on reasonable terms depends on our credit ratings and current overall capital market business conditions. If these conditions deteriorate to the extent that we no longer have access to the capital markets at reasonable terms, we have access to credit facilities with aggregate bank commitments of $6.1 billion. We utilize our credit facilities to support our commercial paper programs, provide for other short-term borrowings and to issue letters of credit. See the &#8220;Credit Matters and Cash Requirements&#8221; section below for additional information. We expect cash flows to be sufficient to meet operating expenses, financing costs, and capital expenditure requirements. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our debt and credit agreements. 

Pursuant to the Separation Agreement between us and Exelon, we received a cash payment of $1.75 billion from Exelon on January 31, 2022. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the separation. 

NRC Minimum Funding Requirements 

NRC regulations require that licensees of nuclear generating facilities demonstrate reasonable assurance that sufficient funds will be available in certain minimum amounts to decommission the facility. These NRC minimum funding levels are typically based upon the assumption that decommissioning activities will commence after the end of the current licensed life of each unit. If a unit fails the NRC minimum funding test, then the plant&#8217;s owners or parent companies would be required to take steps, such as providing financial guarantees through surety bonds, letters of credit, or parent company guarantees or making additional cash contributions to the NDT fund to ensure sufficient funds are available. See Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

If a nuclear plant were to retire before the end of its licensed life, there is a risk that it will no longer meet the NRC minimum funding requirements due to the earlier commencement of decommissioning activities and a shorter time period over which the NDT funds could appreciate in value. A shortfall could require that we address the shortfall by providing additional financial assurances, such as surety bonds, letters of credit, or parent company guarantees for our share of the funding assurance. However, the amount of any assurance will ultimately depend on the decommissioning approach, the associated level of costs, and the NDT fund investment performance going forward. No later than two years after shutting down a plant, we must submit a Post-shutdown Decommissioning Activities Report (PSDAR) to the NRC that includes the planned option for decommissioning the site. 

Upon issuance of any additional financial assurance mechanisms to address a decommissioning funding shortfall, subject to satisfying various regulatory preconditions, each site would be able to utilize the respective NDT funds for radiological decommissioning costs, which represent the majority of the total expected decommissioning costs. However, under the regulations, the NRC must approve an exemption in order for us to utilize the NDT funds to pay for non-radiological decommissioning costs (i.e., spent fuel management and site restoration costs, if applicable). Any amounts not covered by an exemption would be borne by us without reimbursement. 

As of December 31, 2023, we are not required to provide any additional financial assurance for TMI Unit 1 under the SAFSTOR scenario that is the planned decommissioning option, as described in the TMI Unit 1 PSDAR filed with the NRC on April 5, 2019. On October 16, 2019, the NRC granted our exemption request to use the TMI Unit 1 NDT funds for spent fuel management costs. On June 8, 2022, the NRC granted our exemption request to use the TMI Unit 1 NDT funds for site restoration costs. 

On November 16, 2023, Zion Station was transferred back to us from ZionSolutions. As of December 31, 2023, we have adequate NDT funds for the remaining radiological decommissioning cost at Zion Station. Decommissioning costs other than radiological may require funding from us. See Note 10 &#8212; Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on Zion Station Decommissioning. 

Cash Flows from Operating Activities 

Our cash flows from operating activities primarily result from the sale of electric energy and energy-related products and services to customers. Our future cash flows from operating activities may be affected by future demand for, and market prices of, energy and our ability to continue to produce and supply power at competitive costs, as well as to obtain collections from customers and the sale of certain receivables. 

See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters and Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on regulatory and legal proceedings and proposed legislation. 

The following table provides a summary of the change in cash flows from operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022: 

##TABLE_START For the Years Ended December 31, 

Cash flows from operating activities 

2023 2022 Change 

Net income (loss) 

$ 1,577 $ (167) $ 1,744 

Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to cash: 

Changes in working capital and other noncurrent assets and liabilities (a) 

(8,355) (5,246) (3,109) Collateral received (posted), net 

(1,491) (351) (1,140) Option premiums received (paid), net 

26 (177) 203 Pension and non-pension postretirement benefit contributions (54) (237) 183 Total non-cash operating activities (b) 

2,996 3,825 (829) 

Net cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities 

$ (5,301) $ (2,353) $ (2,948) ##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) Includes changes in Accounts receivable, Receivables from and payables to affiliates, net, Inventories, Accounts payable and accrued expenses, Income taxes, and Other assets and liabilities. 

(b) See the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for details of non-cash operating activities, includes Depreciation, amortization, and accretion, Asset impairments, Gain on sales of assets and businesses, Deferred income taxes and amortization of ITCs, Net fair value changes related to derivatives, and Net realized and unrealized activity associated with NDTs and equity investments. See Note 23 &#8212; Supplemental Financial Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Other non-cash operating activities line. 

Changes in our cash flows from operations were generally consistent with changes in results of operations, as adjusted by changes in working capital in the normal course of business, except as discussed below. In addition, significant operating cash flow impacts for 2023 and 2022 were as follows: 

&#8226; A net increase in cash outflows for changes in working capital and other noncurrent assets and liabilities primarily relates to a decrease in Accounts payable and accrued expenses, primarily driven by lower gas prices and a decrease in CMC program activity for the current year. This was partially offset by a decrease in Accounts receivable, mainly driven by higher contracted prices and volumes at year end 2022, including the impact of the December 2022 weather event. Additionally, there was a decrease in Other assets and liabilities, primarily driven by an increase in cash collections applied to DPP due to a decrease in the drawn customer accounts receivable Facility balance in 2023 compared to 2022 . See Note 6 &#8212; Accounts Receivable of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the sales of customer accounts receivable. 

&#8226; Depending upon whether we are in a net mark-to-market liability or asset position, collateral may be required to be posted with or collected from our counterparties. In addition, the collateral posting and collection requirements differ depending on whether the transactions are on an exchange or in the over-the-counter markets. See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on collateral. 

&#8226; Option premiums paid, net relate to options contracts that we purchase and sell as part of our established policies and procedures to manage risks associated with market fluctuations in commodity 

prices. Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on derivative contracts. 

&#8226; Decrease in cash outflows for pension and non-pension postretirement benefit contributions is primarily due to our annual qualified pension contribution of $21 million and $192 million made in July 2023 and February 2022, respectively. See Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on pension and non-pension postretirement benefit plans. 

Cash Flows from Investing Activities 

The following table provides a summary of the change in cash flows from investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022: 

##TABLE_START For the Years Ended December 31, 

Cash flows from investing activities 

2023 2022 Change 

Acquisitions of assets and businesses 

$ (1,690) $ (29) $ (1,661) Capital expenditures (2,422) (1,689) (733) Proceeds from sales of assets and businesses 24 52 (28) Investment in NDT funds, net (228) (221) (7) Collection of DPP, net 7,340 4,964 2,376 Other investing activities 7 27 (20) 

Net cash flows provided by (used in) investing activities 

$ 3,031 $ 3,104 $ (73) ##TABLE_END

Significant investing cash flow impacts for 2023 and 2022 were as follows: 

&#8226; See Note 2 &#8212; Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the STP acquisition . 

&#8226; Variances in capital expenditures are primarily due to the timing of cash payments for capital projects. See the "Credit Matters and Cash Requirements" section below for additional information on projected capital expenditure spending. 

&#8226; Collection of DPP, net increased due to cash collections from the customer accounts receivable Facility, as discussed in the Cash Flows from Operating Activities section above. This was partially offset by a reduction in cash proceeds received from the Purchasers in 2023 compared to 2022. See Note 6 &#8212; Accounts Receivable of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Cash Flows from Financing Activities 

The following table provides a summary of the change in cash flows from financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2023 and 2022: 

##TABLE_START For the Years Ended December 31, 

Cash flows from financing activities 

2023 2022 Change Long-term debt, net $ 3,027 $ (1,406) $ 4,433 Changes in short-term borrowings, net 485 (923) 1,408 Dividends paid on common stock (366) (185) (181) Repurchases of common stock (992) &#8212; (992) Contributions from Exelon &#8212; 1,750 (1,750) Other financing activities 42 (35) 77 

Net cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities 

$ 2,196 $ (799) $ 2,995 ##TABLE_END

Significant financing cash flow impacts for 2023 and 2022 were as follows: 

&#8226; Long-term debt, net, varies due to debt issuances and redemptions each year. Refer to debt issuances and redemptions tables below for additional information. 

&#8226; Changes in short-term borrowings, net , is driven by repayments on and issuances of notes due in less than 365 days. Refer to Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on short-term borrowings. 

&#8226; Refer to ITEM 5. &#8212; MARKET FOR REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES for additional information on dividend restrictions. See below for quarterly dividends declared. 

&#8226; Repurchases of common stock is related to our share repurchase program that commenced in March 2023. See Note 20 &#8212; Shareholders' Equity of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

&#8226; Contributions from Exelon is primarily related to a cash contribution of $1.75 billion from Exelon on January 31, 2022, pursuant to the Separation Agreement. See Note 1 &#8212; Basis of Presentation of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the separation. 

Debt Issuances and Redemptions 

See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our long-term debt. Debt activity for 2023 and 2022 was as follows: 

During 2023, the following long-term debt was issued: 

##TABLE_START Type Interest Rate Maturity Amount Use of Proceeds 

2053 Senior Notes 

6.50 % October 1, 2053 $ 900 To fund the acquisition of STP and general corporate purposes 

2028 Senior Notes 

5.60 % March 1, 2028 750 To fund general corporate purposes, including repayment of short-term borrowings 

2033 Senior Notes 

5.80 % March 1, 2033 600 To fund general corporate purposes, including repayment of short-term borrowings 

2034 Senior Notes 

6.13 % January 15, 2034 500 To fund the acquisition of STP and general corporate purposes 

Tax-Exempt Notes Reoffering 

4.10% - 4.45% 2025-2053 (b) 

435 To fund general corporate purposes, including repayment of short-term borrowings 

Energy Efficiency Project Financing (a) 

2.20% - 4.96% March 31, 2024 - June 30, 2024 11 Funding to install energy conservation measures 

Total 

$ 3,196 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) For Energy Efficiency Project Financing, the maturity dates represent the expected date of project completion, upon which the respective customer assumes the outstanding debt. 

(b) The Tax-Exempt Notes have a maturity date of March 1, 2025 - April 1, 2053, and a mandatory purchase date that ranges from March 1, 2025 - June 1, 2029. 

During 2022, the following long-term debt was issued: 

##TABLE_START Type Interest Rate Maturity Amount Use of Proceeds 

Energy Efficiency Project Financing (a) 

2.20% - 6.96% March 31, 2023 - May 1, 2024 $ 14 

Funding to install energy conservation measures 

##TABLE_END __________ 

(a) For Energy Efficiency Project Financing, the maturity dates represent the expected date of project completion, upon which the respective customer assumes the outstanding debt. 

During 2023, the following long-term debt was retired and/or redeemed: 

##TABLE_START Type Interest Rate Maturity Amount Energy Efficiency Project Financing 2.44% - 6.96% 

May 31, 2023 - March 31, 2024 

$ 44 

CR Nonrecourse Debt 

3-month SOFR + 2.76% (a) 

December 15, 2027 39 

West Medway II Nonrecourse Debt 

1-month SOFR + 2.975% - 3.225% (b)(d) 

March 31, 2026 26 

Continental Wind Nonrecourse Debt 

6.00% February 28, 2033 25 

Antelope Valley DOE Nonrecourse Debt (c) 

2.29% - 3.56% 

January 5, 2037 25 

RPG Nonrecourse Debt 

4.11% March 31, 2035 9 

Total 

$ 168 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) The interest rate for long-term debt redemptions prior to June 2023 were based on LIBOR + 2.50%. Beginning in June 2023, these redemptions are based on SOFR + 2.76%. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the CR nonrecourse debt. 

(b) The interest rate for long-term debt redemptions prior to May 2023 were based on LIBOR + 2.875%. Beginning in May 2023, these redemptions are based on SOFR + the variable interest rate of 2.975% - 3.225%. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the West Medway II nonrecourse debt. 

(c) On January 5, 2024, we redeemed $5.5 million of 2.29% - 3.56% Antelope Valley DOE nonrecourse debt. 

(d) The nonrecourse debt has an average blended interest rate. 

During 2022, the following long-term debt was retired and/or redeemed: 

##TABLE_START Type 

Interest Rate Maturity Amount 

Senior Notes 

3.40% March 15, 2022 $ 500 

Senior Notes 

4.25% June 15, 2022 523 

CR Nonrecourse Debt (a) 

3-month LIBOR + 2.50% 

December 15, 2027 41 

Continental Wind Nonrecourse Debt (a) 

6.00% February 28, 2033 37 

West Medway II Nonrecourse Debt (a) 

1 month LIBOR + 2.875% (c) 

March 31, 2026 24 

Antelope Valley DOE Nonrecourse Debt (a)(b) 

2.29% - 3.56% January 5, 2037 25 

RPG Nonrecourse Debt (a) 

4.11% March 31, 2035 9 

Energy Efficiency Project Financing 

3.71% December 31, 2022 3 

Total 

$ 1,162 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on nonrecourse debt. 

(b) On January 6, 2023, we redeemed $5 million of 2.29% - 3.56% Antelope Valley DOE nonrecourse debt. 

(c) The nonrecourse debt has an average blended interest rate. 

From time to time and as market conditions warrant, we may engage in long-term debt retirements via tender offers, open market repurchases or other viable options to reduce debt. 

Dividends 

Quarterly dividends declared by our Board of Directors during 2023 and for the first quarter of 2024 were as follows: 

##TABLE_START Period Declaration Date Shareholder of Record Date Dividend Payable Date Cash per Share 

First Quarter of 2023 

February 15, 2023 February 27, 2023 March 10, 2023 $ 0.2820 

Second Quarter of 2023 

April 25, 2023 May 12, 2023 June 9, 2023 $ 0.2820 

Third Quarter of 2023 

August 1, 2023 August 14, 2023 September 8, 2023 $ 0.2820 Fourth Quarter of 2023 November 1, 2023 November 17, 2023 December 8, 2023 $ 0.2820 

First Quarter of 2024 

February 26, 2024 March 8, 2024 March 19, 2024 $ 0.3525 ##TABLE_END

Credit Matters and Cash Requirements 

We fund liquidity needs for capital expenditures, working capital, energy hedging and other financial commitments through cash flows from operations, public debt offerings, commercial paper markets and large, diversified credit facilities. As of December 31, 2023, we have access to facilities with aggregate bank commitments of $6.1 billion. We had access to the commercial paper markets and had availability under our revolving credit facilities during 2023 to fund our short-term liquidity needs, when necessary. We routinely review the sufficiency of our liquidity position, including appropriate sizing of credit facility commitments, by performing various stress test scenarios, such as commodity price movements, increases in margin-related transactions, changes in hedging levels, and the impacts of hypothetical credit downgrades. We closely monitor events in the financial markets and the financial institutions associated with the credit facilities, including monitoring credit ratings and outlooks, credit default swap levels, capital raising, and merger activity. See PART I, ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS for additional information regarding the effects of uncertainty in the capital and credit markets. 

We believe our cash flow from operating activities, access to credit markets and our credit facilities provide sufficient liquidity to support the estimated future cash requirements discussed below. 

If we had lost our investment grade credit ratings as of December 31, 2023, we would have been required to provide incremental collateral estimated to be approximately $1.9 billion to meet collateral obligations for derivatives, non-derivatives, NPNS, and applicable payables and receivables, net of the contractual right of offset under master netting agreements. A loss of investment grade credit rating would have required a three notch downgrade by S&#38;P or a two notch downgrade by Moody's from their current levels of BBB+ and Baa2, to BB+ and Ba1 or below. respectively. As of December 31, 2023, we had $3.1 billion of available capacity and $0.4 billion of cash on hand. In the event of a credit downgrade below investment grade and a resulting requirement to provide incremental collateral exceeding our available capacity and cash on hand, we would be required to access additional liquidity through the capital markets. See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments and Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Capital Expenditures 

Our most recent estimate of capital expenditures is approximately $2.8 billion and $2.3 billion for 2024 and 2025 respectively. Approximately 44% - 47% of projected capital expenditures are for the acquisition of nuclear fuel, which includes additional nuclear fuel to increase inventory levels. This is a strategic decision in response to the potential for the continuing Russia and Ukraine conflict to impact our long-term nuclear fuel supply. Additionally, the above estimates of capital expenditures includes $875 million of growth capital expenditures, including nuclear uprates and license renewals, wind repowering, and hydrogen with policy support. The remaining amounts primarily reflect additions and upgrades to existing generation facilities (including material condition improvements during nuclear refueling outages). See ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, Other Key Business Drivers for more information on the Russia and Ukraine conflict. 

Planned additions and upgrades and other investments are subject to periodic review and revision to reflect changes in economic conditions impacting our generating assets and other factors, including, but not limited to, market power prices, results of capacity auctions, potential legislative and regulatory actions, impacts of inflation, changes in the cost of materials and labor, and financing costs. 

We anticipate funding these capital expenditures with a combination of internally generated funds and borrowings. 

Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits 

We consider various factors when making pension funding decisions, including actuarially-determined minimum contribution requirements under ERISA, contributions required to avoid benefit restrictions and at-risk status as defined by the Pension Protection Act, and management of the pension obligation. The Pension Protection Act requires the attainment of certain funding levels to avoid benefit restrictions (such as an inability to pay lump sums or to accrue benefits prospectively) and at-risk status (which triggers higher minimum contribution requirements and participant notification). The contributions below reflect a funding strategy to make levelized annual contributions with the objective of achieving 100% funded status over time. This level-funding strategy helps minimize volatility of future period required pension contributions. Unlike the qualified pension plans, our non-qualified pension plans are not funded, given that they are not subject to statutory minimum contribution requirements. 

OPEB plans are also not subject to statutory minimum contribution requirements, though we have funded certain of our plans. For our funded OPEB plans, we consider several factors in determining the level of contributions including liabilities management and levels of benefit claims paid. 

The following table provides our planned contributions to our qualified pension plans, non-qualified pension plans, and OPEB plans in 2024 (including our benefit payments related to unfunded plans): 

##TABLE_START Qualified Pension Plans Non-Qualified Pension Plans OPEB Total 

Planned contributions $ 161 $ 13 $ 20 $ 194 ##TABLE_END

To the extent interest rates decline significantly or the pension and OPEB plans earn less than the expected asset returns, annual pension contribution requirements in future years could increase. Conversely, to the extent interest rates increase significantly or the pension and OPEB plans earn greater than the expected asset returns, annual pension and OPEB contribution requirements in future years could decrease. Additionally, expected contributions could change if we change our pension or OPEB funding strategy. See Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on pension and OPEB contributions. 

Cash Requirements for Other Financial Commitments 

The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments as of December 31, 2023 under existing financial commitments: 

##TABLE_START 2024 Beyond 2024 

Total Time Period Long-term debt $ 121 $ 7,556 $ 7,677 2024 - 2053 

Interest payments on long-term debt (a) 

403 4,699 5,102 2024 - 2053 

Operating leases (b) 

54 463 517 2024 - 2056 

Purchase power obligations (c) 

958 1,164 2,122 2024 - 2033 

Fuel purchase agreements (d) 

1,464 8,634 10,098 2024 - 2040 

Other purchase obligations (e) 

1,198 1,121 2,319 2024 - 2049 

SNF obligation &#8212; 1,296 1,296 2024 - 2035 

Pension contributions (f) 

161 672 833 2024 - 2029 

Total cash requirements $ 4,359 $ 25,605 $ 29,964 ##TABLE_END

__________ 

(a) Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2023 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions, or debt issuances. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2023. 

(b) Capacity payments associated with contracted generation lease agreements are net of sublease and capacity offsets of $47 million and $275 million for 2024 and beyond 2024, respectively and $322 million in total. 

(c) Purchase power obligations primarily include expected payments for REC purchases and capacity payments associated with contracted generation agreements, which may be reduced based on plant availability. Expected payments exclude payments on renewable generation contracts that are contingent in nature. 

(d) Represents commitments to purchase nuclear fuel and related services and natural gas-related transportation and capacity. 

(e) Represents the future estimated value at December 31, 2023 of the cash flows associated with all contracts, both cancellable and non-cancellable, entered into with third-parties for the provision of services and materials, entered into in the normal course of business not specifically reflected elsewhere in this table. These estimates are subject to significant variability from period to period. 

(f) These amounts represent our expected contributions to our qualified pension plans. Qualified pension contributions for years after 2029 are not included. 

See Note 3 &#8212; Regulatory Matters and Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information of our other commitments potentially triggered by future events. Additionally, see below for where to find additional information regarding the financial commitments in the table above in the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 

##TABLE_START Item Location within Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Long-term debt Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements Interest payments on long-term debt Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements Operating leases Note 11 &#8212; Leases SNF obligation Note 19 &#8212; Commitments and Contingencies Pension contributions Note 15 &#8212; Retirement Benefits ##TABLE_END

Sales of Customer Accounts Receivable 

We have an accounts receivable financing facility with a number of financial institutions and a commercial paper conduit to sell certain receivables, which expires on August 15, 2025 unless renewed by the mutual consent of the parties in accordance with its terms. See Note 6 &#8212; Accounts Receivable of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 

Project Financing 

Project financing is based upon a nonrecourse financial structure, in which project debt is paid back from the cash generated by a specific asset or portfolio of assets. Borrowings under these agreements are secured by the 

assets and equity of each respective project. Lenders do not have recourse against us in the event of a default. If a project financing entity does not maintain compliance with its specific debt covenants, there could be a requirement to accelerate repayment of the associated debt or other project-related borrowings earlier than the stated maturity dates. In these instances, if such repayment were not satisfied, or restructured, the lenders or security holders would generally have rights to foreclose against the project-specific assets and related collateral. The potential requirement to repay the debt or other borrowings earlier than otherwise anticipated could lead to impairments due to a higher likelihood of disposing of the respective project-specific assets significantly before the end of their useful lives. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on project finance credit facilities and nonrecourse debt. 

Credit Facilities 

We meet our short-term liquidity requirements primarily through the issuance of commercial paper. We may use our credit facilities for general corporate purposes, including meeting short-term funding requirements and the issuance of letters of credit. See Note 17 &#8212; Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our credit facilities. 

Capital Structure 

At December 31, 2023, our capital structure consisted of the following: 

##TABLE_START Percentage of Capital Structure Commercial paper and notes payable 8 % Long-term debt 37 % Member&#8217;s equity 55 % ##TABLE_END

Security Ratings 

Our access to the capital markets, including the commercial paper market, and our financing costs in those markets, may depend on our securities ratings. 

Our borrowings are not subject to default or prepayment as a result of a downgrade of our securities, although such a downgrade could increase fees and interest charges under our credit agreements. 

As part of the normal course of business, we enter into contracts that contain express provisions or otherwise permit us and our counterparties to demand adequate assurance of future performance when there are reasonable grounds for doing so. In accordance with the contracts and applicable contracts law, if we are downgraded by a credit rating agency, it is possible that a counterparty would attempt to rely on such a downgrade as a basis for making a demand for adequate assurance of future performance, which could include the posting of additional collateral. See Note 16 &#8212; Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on collateral provisions. 

At separation, S&#38;P and Moody's affirmed our senior unsecured ratings of BBB- and Baa2, respectively. Fitch also affirmed their final rating of BBB, prior to formally withdrawing coverage on January 5th, 2022. We have only engaged S&#38;P and Moody's for ratings coverage following separation. On October 13, 2022, S&#38;P raised our senior unsecured debt rating to 'BBB' from 'BBB-' citing the passage of the IRA as a material credit positive for us. On November 22, 2023, S&#38;P further raised our senior unsecured debt rating to 'BBB+' from 'BBB' citing the expected benefits from nuclear PTCs. 

##TABLE_START 

Instruction: 
According to the given information, 
1. Briefly describe the company overview and companys industry, using the structure: "Founded in xxxx, 'company name' is a xxxx that provides .....
2. Highlight core strengths and competitive advantages key products or services,
3. Include topics about end market (geography), major customers (blue chip or not), market share for market position section,
4. Identify current industry trends, opportunities, and challenges that influence the companys strategy,
5. Outline recent strategic initiatives such as product launches, acquisitions, or new partnerships, and describe the company's response to market conditions. 
Less than 300 words.


Instruction: Summarize the analysis, less than 130 words.