Resource: Resource: Company Name: NextEra Energy, Inc.

Business summary:
 Item 1. Business 

OVERVIEW 

NEE is one of the largest electric power and energy infrastructure companies in North America and a leader in the renewable energy industry. NEE has two principal businesses, FPL and NEER. FPL is the largest electric utility in the state of Florida and one of the largest electric utilities in the U.S. FPL&#8217;s strategic focus is centered on investing in generation, transmission and distribution facilities to deliver on its value proposition of low customer bills, high reliability, outstanding customer service and clean energy for the benefit of its approximately 5.9 million customer accounts. NEER is the world's largest generator of renewable energy from the wind and sun, as well as a world leader in battery storage. NEER&#8217;s strategic focus is centered on the development, construction and operation of long-term contracted assets throughout the U.S. and Canada, primarily consisting of clean energy assets, such as renewable generation facilities, and electric transmission facilities, as well as providing other clean energy solutions to its customers. 

In January 2019, NEE acquired Gulf Power Company, a rate-regulated electric utility engaged in the generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electric energy in northwest Florida. On January 1, 2021, FPL and Gulf Power Company merged, with FPL as the surviving entity. However, during 2021, FPL continued to be regulated as two separate ratemaking entities in the former service areas of FPL and Gulf Power Company. Effective January 1, 2022, FPL became regulated as one electric ratemaking entity with new unified rates and tariffs (see FPL &#8211; FPL Regulation &#8211; FPL Electric Rate Regulation &#8211; Base Rates &#8211; Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025). 

As described in more detail in the following sections, NEE seeks to create value in its two principal businesses by meeting its customers' needs more economically and more reliably than its competitors. NEE's strategy has resulted in profitable growth over sustained periods at both FPL and NEER. Management seeks to grow each business (see Note 15 &#8211; Commitments) in a manner consistent with the varying opportunities available to it; however, management believes that the diversification and balance represented by FPL and NEER is a valuable characteristic of the enterprise and recognizes that each business contributes to NEE's financial strength in different ways. FPL and NEER share a common platform with the objective of lowering costs, creating efficiencies and encouraging innovative ideas for their businesses. NEE and its subsidiaries, with employees totaling approximately 16,800 as of December 31, 2023, continue to develop and implement enterprise-wide initiatives focused on improving productivity, process effectiveness and quality. 

On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) was signed into law which, among other things, extends the period for wind and solar tax credits, expands the tax credits to support a broader range of renewable technologies and allows renewable energy tax credits to be transferred. See NEER &#8211; Clean Energy and Other Operations &#8211; Clean Energy &#8211; Policy Incentives for Renewable Energy Projects. NEE believes the IRA provides long-term visibility and supports the growth of its businesses. 

NEE's reportable segments for financial reporting purposes are FPL and NEER (see Note 16). NEECH, a wholly owned subsidiary of NEE, owns and provides funding for NEE's operating subsidiaries, other than FPL and its subsidiaries. NEP, an affiliate of NextEra Energy Resources, acquires, manages and owns contracted clean energy assets with stable, long-term cash flows. See NEER section below for further discussion of NEP. The following diagram depicts NEE's simplified ownership structure: 

s 

FPL 

FPL is a rate-regulated electric utility engaged primarily in the generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electric energy in Florida. FPL is the largest electric utility in the state of Florida and one of the largest electric utilities in the U.S. At December 31, 2023, FPL had 33,276 MW of net generating capacity, approximately 90,000 circuit miles of transmission and distribution lines and 883 substations. FPL provides service to its electric customers through an integrated transmission and distribution system that links its generation facilities to its customers. 

FPL serves more than 12 million people through approximately 5.9 million customer accounts. The following map shows FPL's service areas and plant locations as of February 16, 2024, which cover most of the east and lower west coasts of Florida and are in ten counties throughout northwest Florida (see FPL Sources of Generation below). 

s 

CUSTOMERS AND REVENUE 

FPL's primary source of operating revenues is from its retail customer base; it also serves a limited number of wholesale customers within Florida. The percentage of FPL's operating revenues and customer accounts by customer class were as follows: 

##TABLE_START 

##TABLE_END

For both retail and wholesale customers, the prices (or rates) that FPL may charge are approved by regulatory bodies, by the FPSC in the case of retail customers and by the FERC in the case of wholesale customers. In general, under U.S. and Florida law, regulated rates are intended to cover the cost of providing service, including a reasonable rate of return on invested capital. Since the regulatory bodies have authority to determine the relevant cost of providing service and the appropriate rate of return on capital employed, there can be no guarantee that FPL will be able to earn any particular rate of return or recover all of its costs through regulated rates. See FPL Regulation below. 

FPL seeks to maintain attractive rates for its customers. Since rates are largely cost-based, maintaining low rates requires a strategy focused on developing and maintaining a low-cost position, including the implementation of ideas generated from cost savings initiatives. 

FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS AND COMPETITION 

FPL's service to its electric retail customers is provided primarily under franchise agreements negotiated with municipalities or counties. During the term of a franchise agreement, which is typically 30 years, the municipality or county agrees not to form its own utility, and FPL has the right to offer electric service to residents. At December 31, 2023, FPL held 226 franchise agreements with various municipalities and counties in Florida with varying expiration dates through 2053. These franchise agreements cover the vast majority of FPL's retail customer base in Florida. At December 31, 2023, FPL also provided service to customers in 10 other municipalities and to 27 unincorporated areas within its service area without franchise agreements pursuant to the general obligation to serve as a public utility. FPL relies upon Florida law for access to public rights of way. 

Because any customer may elect to provide their own electric services, FPL effectively must compete for an individual customer's business. As a practical matter, few customers provide their own service at the present time since FPL's cost of service is lower than the cost of self-generation for a significant majority of customers. Changing technology (particularly increasing efficiency of solar power generation), tax incentives, economic conditions, regulatory changes, increasing cost-competitiveness of rooftop solar and batteries and other factors could alter the favorable relative cost position that FPL currently enjoys; however, FPL seeks as a matter of strategy to ensure that it delivers superior value, in the form of comparatively low customer bills, high reliability, outstanding customer service and clean energy. 

In addition to self-generation by residential, commercial and industrial customers, FPL also faces competition from other suppliers of electrical energy to wholesale and industrial customers and from alternative energy sources. In 2023, 2022 and 2021, operating revenues from wholesale and ind ustrial electric customers combined represented approximately 5%, 7% and 6%, respectively, of FPL's total operating revenues. 

For the building of new steam and solar generating capacity of 75 MW or greater, the FPSC requires investor-owned electric utilities, including FPL, to issue a request for proposal (RFP) except when the FPSC determines that an exception from the RFP process is in the public interest. The RFP process allows independent power producers and others to bid to supply the new generating capacity. If a bidder has the most cost-effective alternative, meets other criteria such as financial viability and demonstrates adequate expertise and experience in building and/or operating generating capacity of the type proposed, the investor-owned electric utility would seek to negotiate a PPA with the selected bidder and request that the FPSC approve the terms of the PPA and, if appropriate, provide the required authorization for the construction of the bidder's generating capacity. 

s 

FPL SOURCES OF GENERATION 

At December 31, 2023, FPL's resources for serving load consisted of approximately 33,520 MW of net generating capacity, of which 33,276 MW were from FPL-owned facilities and 244 MW were available through PPAs. FPL owned and operated 44 units with generating capacity of 24,254 MW that primarily use natural gas and 66 solar generation facilities with generating capacity totaling 4,803 MW. In addition, FPL owned, or had undivided interests in, and operated 4 nuclear units with net generating capacity totaling 3,502 MW (see Nuclear Operations below) and had joint ownership interests in 3 coal units located in Mississippi and Georgia it did not operate with net generating capacity totaling 717 MW. FPL retired its share of two coal units in Mississippi in January 2024 and the remaining one in Georgia is expected to be retired in 2028. See Note 7 &#8211; Jointly-Owned Electric Plants regarding the retirement of these plants. FPL also develops and constructs battery storage projects, which when combined with its solar projects, serve to enhance its ability to meet customer needs for a nearly firm generation source. At December 31, 2023, FPL had 469 MW of battery storage capacity that delivers energy to the transmission system. FPL customer usage and operating revenues are typically higher during the summer months, largely due to the prevalent use of air conditioning in its service area. Occasionally, unusually cold temperatures during the winter months result in significant increases in electricity usage for short periods of time. 

Through 2025, FPL plans to add new solar generation with cost recovery through base rates, either through a Solar Base Rate Adjustment (SoBRA) or SolarTogether &#174; (a voluntary community solar program that gives FPL electric customers an opportunity to participate directly in the expansion of solar energy where participants pay a fixed monthly subscription charge and receive credits on their related monthly customer bill). FPL placed 894 MW of solar generating capacity in service in January 2024 and is currently in the process of constructing an additional 1,341 MW and 894 MW of solar generating capacity, which is expected to be placed in service in 2024 and in 2025, respectively (see FPL Regulation &#8211; FPL Electric Rate Regulation &#8211; Base Rates &#8211; Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025 below). 

Fuel Sources 

FPL relies upon a mix of fuel sources for its generation facilities, the ability of some of its generation facilities to operate on both natural gas and low sulfur diesel, and on purchased power to maintain the flexibility to achieve a more economical fuel mix in order to respond to market and industry developments. See discussion of planned solar generation additions above. In 2023, FPL placed a hydrogen facility in service that blends green hydrogen with natural gas at an existing natural gas generation facility. 

##TABLE_START *approximately 66% has dual fuel capability ##TABLE_END

Significant Fuel and Transportation Contracts. At December 31, 2023, FPL had the following significant fuel and transportation contracts in place: 

&#8226; firm transportation contracts with ten different transportation suppliers for natural gas pipeline capacity for an aggregate maximum delivery quantity of 2,836,000 MMBtu/day with expiration dates through 2042 (see Note 15 &#8211; Contracts); 

&#8226; several contracts for the supply of uranium and the conversion, enrichment and fabrication of nuclear fuel with expiration dates through 2037; and 

&#8226; short- and medium-term natural gas supply contracts to provide a portion of FPL's anticipated needs for natural gas, 

s 

with the remainder of FPL's natural gas requirements being purchased in the spot market. 

Nuclear Operations 

At December 31, 2023, FPL owned, or had undivided interests in, and operated the four nuclear units in Florida discussed below. FPL's nuclear units are periodically removed from service to accommodate planned refueling and maintenance outages, including inspections, repairs and certain other modifications. Scheduled nuclear refueling outages require the unit to be removed from service for variable lengths of time. 

##TABLE_START Facility Net Generating Capacity (MW) Beginning of Next Scheduled Refueling Outage Operating License Expiration Date St. Lucie Unit No. 1 981 March 2024 2036 (a) 

St. Lucie Unit No. 2 840 (b) 

August 2024 2043 (a) 

Turkey Point Unit No. 3 837 October 2024 2032 (c) 

Turkey Point Unit No. 4 844 March 2025 2033 (c) 

##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) In 2021, FPL filed an application with the NRC to renew both St. Lucie operating licenses for an additional 20 years. License renewals are pending. 

(b) Excludes 147 MW operated by FPL but owned by non-affiliates. 

(c) In 2022, FPL filed a site-specific environmental impact statement with the NRC related to the previously approved 20-year renewal application for both Turkey Point operating licenses. Approval of the additional 20 years of operations is pending. 

NRC regulations require FPL to submit a plan for decontamination and decommissioning five years before the projected end of plant operation. If the license renewals are approved by the NRC, FPL's plans provide for St. Lucie Unit No. 1 to be shut down in 2056 with decommissioning activities to be integrated with the dismantlement of St. Lucie Unit No. 2 commencing in 2063. If the NRC approves an additional 20 years of operations, FPL's plans provide for the dismantlement of Turkey Point Units Nos. 3 and 4 with decommissioning activities commencing in 2052 and 2053, respectively. 

FPL's nuclear facilities use both on-site storage pools and dry storage casks to store spent nuclear fuel generated by these facilities, which are expected to provide sufficient storage of spent nuclear fuel that is generated at these facilities through license expiration, as well as through any pending license extensions. 

FPL ENERGY MARKETING AND TRADING 

FPL's Energy Marketing &#38; Trading division (EMT) buys and sells wholesale energy commodities, such as natural gas, low sulfur diesel, electricity and renewable energy credits (RECs) from certain FPL solar generation assets. EMT procures natural gas and low sulfur diesel for FPL's use in power generation and sells excess natural gas, low sulfur diesel and electricity. EMT also uses derivative instruments (primarily swaps, options and forwards) to manage the physical and financial risks inherent in the purchase and sale of fuel and electricity. Substantially all of the results of EMT's activities are passed through to customers in the fuel or capacity clauses. See Management's Discussion &#8211; Energy Marketing and Trading and Market Risk Sensitivity and Note 3. 

FPL REGULATION 

FPL's operations are subject to regulation by a number of federal, state and other organizations, including, but not limited to, the following: 

&#8226; the FPSC, which has jurisdiction over retail rates, service area, issuances of securities, and planning, siting and construction of facilities, among other things; 

&#8226; the FERC, which oversees the acquisition and disposition of electric generation, transmission and other facilities, transmission of electricity and natural gas in interstate commerce, proposals to build and operate interstate natural gas pipelines and storage facilities, and wholesale purchases and sales of electric energy, among other things; 

&#8226; the NERC, which, through its regional entities, establishes and enforces mandatory reliability standards, subject to approval by the FERC, to ensure the reliability of the U.S. electric transmission and generation system and to prevent major system blackouts; 

&#8226; the NRC, which has jurisdiction over the operation of nuclear power plants through the issuance of operating licenses, rules, regulations and orders; and 

&#8226; the EPA, which has the responsibility to maintain and enforce national standards under a variety of environmental laws, in some cases delegating authority to state agencies. The EPA also works with industries and all levels of government, including federal and state governments, in a wide variety of voluntary pollution prevention programs and energy conservation efforts. 

s 

FPL Electric Rate Regulation 

The FPSC sets rates at a level that is intended to allow the utility the opportunity to collect from retail customers total revenues (revenue requirements) equal to its cost of providing service, including a reasonable rate of return on invested capital. To accomplish this, the FPSC uses various ratemaking mechanisms, including, among other things, base rates and cost recovery clauses. Although FPL and Gulf Power Company merged effective January 1, 2021, FPL continued to be regulated as two separate rate making entities until January 1, 2022 when new unified rates and tariffs became effective for the combined utility system (including the former Gulf Power Company service area). See Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025 below. 

Base Rates . In general, the basic costs of providing electric service, other than fuel and certain other costs, are recovered through base rates, which are designed to recover the costs of constructing, operating and maintaining the utility system. These basic costs include O&#38;M expenses, depreciation and taxes, as well as a return on investment in assets used and useful in providing electric service (rate base). At the time base rates are established, the allowed rate of return on rate base approximates the FPSC's determination of the utility's estimated weighted-average cost of capital, which includes its costs for outstanding debt and an allowed return on common equity. The FPSC monitors the utility's actual regulatory ROE through a surveillance report that is filed monthly with the FPSC. The FPSC does not provide assurance that any regulatory ROE will be achieved. Base rates are determined in rate proceedings o r through negotiated settlements of those proceedings. Proceedings can occur at the initiative of the utility or upon action by the FPSC. Existing base rates remain in effect until new base rates are approved by the FPSC. 

Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025 &#8211; In December 2021, the FPSC issued a final order approving a stipulation and settlement between FPL and several intervenors in FPL's base rate proceeding (2021 rate agreement). 

Key elements of the 2021 rate agreement, which is effective from January 2022 through at least December 2025, include, among other things, the following: 

&#8226; New retail base rates and charges were established for the combined utility system (including the former Gulf Power Company service area) resulting in the following increases in annualized retail base revenues: 

&#9702; $692 million beginning January 1, 2022, and 

&#9702; $560 million beginning January 1, 2023. 

&#8226; In addition, FPL is eligible to receive, subject to conditions specified in the 2021 rate agreement, base rate increases associated with the addition of up to 894 MW annually of new solar generation through the SoBRA mechanism in each of 2024 and 2025, and may carry forward any unused MW in 2024 to 2025. FPL has agreed to an installed cost cap of $1,250 per kW and will be required to demonstrate that these proposed solar facilities are cost effective. 

&#8226; FPL's authorized regulatory ROE was 10.60%, with a range of 9.70% to 11.70%. However, in the event the average 30-year U.S. Treasury rate was 2.49% or greater over a consecutive six-month period, FPL was authorized to increase the regulatory ROE to 10.80% with a range of 9.80% to 11.80%. During August 2022, this provision was triggered and effective September 1, 2022, FPL's authorized regulatory ROE and ROE range were increased. If FPL's earned regulatory ROE falls below 9.80%, FPL may seek retail base rate relief. If the earned regulatory ROE rises above 11.80%, any party with standing may seek a review of FPL's retail base rates. 

&#8226; Subject to certain conditions, FPL may amortize, over the term of the 2021 rate agreement, up to $1.45 billion of depreciation reserve surplus, provided that in any year of the 2021 rate agreement FPL must amortize at least enough reserve amount to maintain its minimum authorized regulatory ROE and also may not amortize any reserve amount that would result in an earned regulatory ROE in excess of its maximum authorized regulatory ROE. 

&#8226; FPL is authorized to expand SolarTogether &#174; by constructing an additional 1,788 MW of solar generation from 2022 through 2025, such that the total capacity of SolarTogether &#174; would be 3,278 MW. 

&#8226; Future storm restoration costs would be recoverable on an interim basis beginning 60 days from the filing of a cost recovery petition, but capped at an amount that produces a surcharge of no more than $4 for every 1,000 kWh of usage on residential bills during the first 12 months of cost recovery. Any additional costs would be eligible for recovery in subsequent years. If storm restoration costs exceed $800 million in any given calendar year, FPL may request an increase to the $4 surcharge. See Note 1 &#8211; Storm Funds, Storm Reserves and Storm Cost Recovery. 

&#8226; If federal or state permanent corporate income tax changes become effective during the term of the 2021 rate agreement, FPL will prospectively adjust base rates after a review by the FPSC. As a result of the enactment of the IRA (see NEER &#8211; Clean Energy and Other Operations &#8211; Clean Energy &#8211; Policy Incentives for Renewable Energy Projects), FPL's customers are expected to save approximately $400 million over the remaining term of the 2021 rate agreement which includes a $36 million one-time refund made in January 2023. 

On September 28, 2023, the Florida Supreme Court ruled on the appeal of the FPSC&#8217;s final order regarding FPL&#8217;s 2021 rate agreement by Floridians Against Increased Rates, Inc. and, as a group, Florida Rising, Inc., Environmental Confederation of Southwest Florida, Inc. and League of United Latin American Citizens of Florida. The ruling remands the FPSC's order back to the FPSC. While management is unable to predict with certainty the eventual outcome, FPL believes the FPSC's subsequent order will maintain its determination that the 2021 rate agreement is in the public interest and should remain intact. 

Base Rates Effective January 2017 through December 2021 &#8211; From January 2017 to December 2021, FPL operated under a base rate agreement (2016 rate agreement) that provided for, among other things, a regulatory ROE of 10.55%, with a range of 9.60% to 11.60% and, subject to certain conditions, the right to reduce depreciation expense up to $1.25 billion (reserve), 

s 

provided that in any year of the 2016 rate agreement FPL was required to amortize enough reserve to maintain an earned regulatory ROE within the range of 9.60% to 11.60%. 

Cost Recovery Clauses . Cost recovery clauses are designed to permit full recovery of certain costs and provide a return on certain assets allowed to be recovered through these clauses. Cost recovery clause costs are recovered through levelized monthly charges per kWh or kW, depending on the customer's rate class. These cost recovery clause charges are calculated annually based on estimated costs and estimated customer usage for the following year, plus or minus true-up adjustments to reflect the estimated over or under recovery of costs for the current and prior periods. An adjustment to the levelized charges may be approved during the course of a year to reflect revised estimates. FPL recovers costs from customers through the following clauses: 

&#8226; Fuel &#8211; primarily fuel costs, the most significant of the cost recovery clauses in terms of operating revenues (see Note 1 &#8211; Rate Regulation); 

&#8226; Storm Protection Plan &#8211; costs associated with an FPSC-approved transmission and distribution storm protection plan, which includes costs for hardening of overhead transmission and distribution lines, undergrounding of certain distribution lines and vegetation management; 

&#8226; Capacity &#8211; primarily certain costs associated with the acquisition of several electric generation facilities (see Note 1 &#8211; Rate Regulation) and capacity payments related to PPAs; 

&#8226; Energy Conservatio n &#8211; costs associated with implementing energy conservation programs; and 

&#8226; Environmental &#8211; certain costs of complying with federal, state and local environmental regulations enacted after April 1993 and costs associated with certain of FPL's solar facilities placed in service prior to 2016. 

The FPSC has the authority to disallow recovery of costs that it considers excessive or imprudently incurred. These costs may include, among others, fuel and O&#38;M expenses, the cost of replacing power lost when generation units are unavailable, storm restoration costs and costs associated with the construction or acquisition of new facilities. 

FERC 

The Federal Power Act grants the FERC exclusive ratemaking jurisdiction over wholesale sales of electricity and the transmission of electricity and natural gas in interstate commerce. Pursuant to the Federal Power Act, electric utilities must file for FERC acceptance and maintain tariffs and rate schedules which govern the rates, terms and conditions for the provision of FERC-jurisdictional wholesale power and transmission services. Wholesale power sales tariffs on file at FERC may authorize sales at cost-based rates or, where the seller lacks market power, at market-based rates. The Federal Power Act also gives the FERC authority to certify and oversee an electric reliability organization with authority to establish and independently enforce mandatory reliability standards applicable to all users, owners and operators of the bulk-power system. See NERC below. Electric utilities are subject to accounting, record-keeping and reporting requirements administered by the FERC. The FERC also places certain limitations on transactions between electric utilities and their affiliates. 

NERC 

The NERC has been certified by the FERC as an electric reliability organization. The NERC's mandate is to ensure the reliability and security of the North American bulk-power system through the establishment and enforcement of reliability standards approved by FERC. The NERC's regional entities also enforce reliability standards approved by the FERC. FPL is subject to these reliability standards and incurs costs to ensure compliance with continually heightened requirements, and can incur significant penalties for failing to comply with them. 

FPL Environmental Regulation 

FPL is subject to environmental laws and regulations as described in the NEE Environmental Matters section below. FPL expects to seek recovery through the environmental clause for compliance costs associated with any new environmental laws and regulations. 

FPL HUMAN CAPITAL 

FPL had approximately 9,500 employees at December 31, 2023, with approximately 31% of these employees represented by the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW). The collective bargaining agreements have approximate ly two- to three-year terms and expire between April 2024 and January 2025. 

s 

NEER 

NEER, comprised of NEE's competitive energy and rate-regulated transmission businesses, is a diversified clean energy business with a strategy that emphasizes the development, construction and operation of long-term contracted assets with a focus on clean energy. NEE reports NextEra Energy Resources and NEET, a rate-regulated transmission business, on a combined basis for segment reporting purposes, and the combined segment is referred to as NEER. The NEER segment owns, develops, constructs, manages and operates electric generation facilities in wholesale energy markets in the U.S. a nd Canada and also includes assets and investments in other businesses with a clean energy focus, such as battery storage and renewable fuels. NEER, with appr oximately 30,600 MW of total net generating capacity at December 31, 2023, is one of the largest wholesale generators of electric power in the U.S., including approximately 30,080 MW of net generating capacity across 41 states and 520 MW of net generating capacity in 4 Canadian provinces . At December 31, 2023 , NEER operates facilities, in which it has partial or full ownership interests, with a total generating capacity of approximately 37,700 MW. NEER primarily sells its capacity and/or energy output through long-term power sales agreements with utilities, retail electricity providers, power cooperatives, municipal electric providers and commercial and industrial customers. NEER produces the majority of its electricity from clean and renewable sources as described more fully below. In addition, NEER develops and constructs battery storage projects, which when combined with its renewable projects, serve to enhance its ability to meet customers' firm capacity needs, or as standalone facilities. NEER is the world's largest generator of renewable energy from the wind and sun based on 2023 MWh produced on a net generation basis, as well as a world leader in battery storage. The NEER segment also owns, develops, constructs and operates rate-regulated transmission facilities in North America. At December 31, 2023, NEER's rate-regulated transmission facilities and the transmission lines that connect its electric generation facilities to the electric grid are comprised of approximately 330 substations and 3,585 circuit miles of transmission lines. 

NEER also engages in energy-related commodity marketing and trading activities, including entering into financial and physical contracts. These contracts primarily include power and fuel commodities and their related products for the purpose of providing full energy and capacity requirements services, primarily to distribution utilities in certain markets, and offering customized power and fuel and related risk management services to wholesale customers, as well as to hedge the production from NEER's generation assets that is not sold under long-term power supply agreements. In addition, NEER participates in natural gas, natural gas liquids and oil production through operating and non-operating ownership interests, and in pipeline infrastructure construction, management and operations, through either wholly owned subsidiaries or noncontrolling or joint venture interests, hereafter referred to as the gas infrastructure business. NEER also hedges the expected output from its gas infrastructure production assets to protect against price movements. 

NEP &#8211; Through NEP OpCo, NEP acquires, manages and owns contracted clean energy assets with stable long-term cash flows with a focus on renewable energy projects. NEP's assets include energy projects contributed by or acquired from NextEra Energy Resources, or acquired from third parties, as well as ownership interests in a contracted natural gas pipeline acquired from third parties. NEP also invests to repower or expand certain of its assets. NextEra Energy Resources' indirect limited partnership interest in NEP OpCo based on the number of outstanding NEP OpCo common units was approximately 51.4% at December 31, 2023. NextEra Energy Resources accounts for its ownership interest in NEP as an equity method investment with its earnings/losses from NEP as equity in earnings (losses) of equity method investees and accounts for its project sales to NEP as third-party sales in its consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2023, NEP owned, or had a partial ownership interest in, a portfolio of contracted renewable energy assets consisting of wind, solar and battery storage projects with energy project capacity totaling approximately 10,118 MW and a contracted natural gas pipeline all located in the U.S. as further discussed in Clean Energy and Other Operations. NextEra Energy Resources operates essentially all of the energy projects in NEP's portfolio and its ownership interest in the portfolio's capacity was approximately 4,786 MW at December 31, 2023. 

CLEAN ENERGY AND OTHER OPERATIONS 

NEER sells products associated with its generation facilities (energy, capacity, RECs and ancillary services) in competitive markets in regions where those facilities are located. Customer transactions may be supplied from NEER generation facilities or from purchases in the wholesale markets, or from a combination thereof. See Markets and Competition below. 

s 

NEER's generation and battery storage projects, natural gas pipelines and transmission facilities (including noncontrolling or joint venture interests) at December 31, 2023 are as follows: 

s 

Clean Energy 

##TABLE_START *Primarily natural gas ##TABLE_END

Generation Assets 

NEER's portfolio of generation assets primarily consists of generation facilities with long-term power sales agreements for substantially all of their capacity and/or energy output. Information related to contracted generation assets at December 31, 2023 was as follows: 

&#8226; represented approximately 28,759 MW of total net generating capacity; 

&#8226; weighted-average remaining contract term of the power sales agreements, including the remaining life of the PTCs associated with repowered wind facilities, of approximately 15 years, based on forecasted contributions to earnings and forecasted amounts of electricity produced by the repowered wind facilities; and 

&#8226; several contracts for the supply of uranium and the conversion, enrichment and fabrication of nuclear fuel for all nuclear units with expiration dates through 2033 (see Note 15 &#8211; Contracts). 

NEER's merchant generation assets primarily consist of generation facilities that do not have long-term power sales agreements to sell their capacity and/or energy output and therefore require active marketing and hedging. Merchant generation assets at December 31, 2023 represented approximately 1,842 MW of total net generating capacity, including 805 MW from nuclear generation and 1,032 MW from other peak generation facilities, and are primarily located in the Northeast region of the U.S. NEER utilizes swaps, options, futures and forwards to lock in pricing and manage the commodity price risk inherent in power sales and fuel purchases. 

s 

NEER Generation Assets Fuel/Technology Mix 

During 2023, NextEra Energy Resources generated approximately 96 million megawatt hours utilizing the following mix of fuel sources for generation facilities in which it has an ownership interest: 

##TABLE_START *Primarily natural gas ##TABLE_END

Wind Facilities 

&#8226; located in 23 states in the U.S. and 4 provinces in Canada; 

&#8226; operated a total generating capacity of approximately 24,970 MW at December 31, 2023; 

&#8226; ownership interests in a total net generating capacity of approximately 20,147 MW at December 31, 2023; 

&#9702; essentially all MW are from contracted wind assets located primarily throughout Texas and the West and Midwest regions of the U.S. and Canada; 

&#9702; added approximately 1,651 MW of new generating capacity in the U.S. in 2023 and sold assets to NEP totaling approximately 292 MW (see Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests ). 

Solar Facilities 

&#8226; located in 31 states in the U.S.; 

&#8226; operated photovoltaic and solar thermal facilities with a total generating capacity of approximately 7,650 MW at December 31, 2023; 

&#8226; ownership interests in solar facilities with a total net generating capacity of approximately 5,856 MW at December 31, 2023; 

&#9702; essentially all MW are from contracted solar facilities located primarily throughout the West and South regions of the U.S.; 

&#9702; added approximately 2,073 MW of generating capacity in the U.S. in 2023 and sold assets to NEP totaling approximately 122 MW (see Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests ). 

Nuclear Facilities 

At December 31, 2023, NextEra Energy Resources was the sole owner of the two Point Beach nuclear units shown in the table below and was the largest joint owner of the Seabrook nuclear facility shown in the table below. NEER's nuclear units are periodically removed from service to accommodate planned refueling and maintenance outages, including inspections, repairs and certain other modifications. Scheduled nuclear refueling outages require the unit to be removed from service for variable lengths of time. 

s 

##TABLE_START Facility Location Net Generating Capacity (MW) Portfolio Category Beginning of Next Scheduled Refueling Outage Operating License Expiration Date Seabrook New Hampshire 1,102 (a) 

Merchant (b) 

October 2024 2050 Point Beach Unit No. 1 Wisconsin 595 Contracted (c) 

March 2025 2030 (d) 

Point Beach Unit No. 2 Wisconsin 595 Contracted (c) 

October 2024 2033 (d) 

##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) Excludes 147 MW operated by NEER but owned by non-affiliates. 

(b) Includes 297 MW sold under a long-term contract. 

(c) NEER sells all of the output of Point Beach Units Nos. 1 and 2 under long-term contracts through their current operating license expiration dates. 

(d) In 2020, NEER filed an application with the NRC to renew both Point Beach operating licenses for an additional 20 years. License renewals are pending. 

NEER is responsible for all nuclear unit operations and the ultimate decommissioning of the nuclear units, the cost of which is shared on a pro-rata basis by the joint owners with respect to the Seabrook unit. NRC regulations require plant owners to submit a plan for decontamination and decommissioning five years before the projected end of plant operation. NEER's nuclear facilities use both on-site storage pools and dry storage casks to store spent nuclear fuel generated by these facilities, which, based on existing regulations, are expected to provide sufficient storage of spent nuclear fuel that is generated at these facilities through current license expiration, as well as through any pending license extensions. 

NEER also maintains an approximately 70% interest in Duane Arnold, a nuclear facility located in Iowa that ceased operations in August 2020. NEER submitted a site-specific cost estimate and plan for decontamination and decommissioning to the NRC. All spent nuclear fuel housed onsite is in long-term dry storage until the DOE is able to take possession. NEER estimates that the cost of decommissioning Duane Arnold is fully funded and expects completion by approximately 2080. 

Other Clean Energy 

NEER's portfolio also includes assets and investments in other businesses with a clean energy focus, such as battery storage and renewable fuels. At December 31, 2023, NextEra Energy Resources had net ownership interests in approximately 2,624 MW of battery storage capacity. In addition, NextEra Energy Resources owns, or has a partial ownership interest in, a portfolio of 29 biogas projects, one of which is an operating renewable natural gas facility and the others of which are primarily operating landfill gas-to-electric facilities. 

Policy Incentives for Renewable Energy Projects 

U.S. federal, state and local governments have established various incentives to support the development of renewable energy projects. These incentives include accelerated tax depreciation, PTCs, ITCs, cash grants, tax abatements and RPS programs. Pursuant to the U.S. federal Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System, wind and solar generation facilities are depreciated for tax purposes over a five-year period even though the useful life of such facilities is generally much longer than five years. 

Owners of wind and solar facilities are eligible to claim an income tax credit (the PTC, or an ITC in lieu of the PTC) upon initially achieving commercial operation. This incentive was created under the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and has been extended several times for wind (the previous PTC for solar expired in 2006). The IRA expanded the PTC to include solar generation facilities and extended the 100% PTC and the 30% ITC to wind and solar generation facilities that start construction before the later of 2034 or the end of the calendar year following the year in which greenhouse gas emissions from U.S. electric generation are reduced by 75% from 2022 levels (phaseout). Accordingly, owners of wind and solar generation facilities placed in service in 2022 or later are eligible to claim a PTC (or an ITC in lieu of the PTC) upon initially achieving commercial operation. The PTC is determined based on the amount of electricity produced by the facility during the first ten years of commercial operation. Alternatively, an ITC equal to 30% of the cost of the facility may be claimed in lieu of the PTC. A facility must also meet certain labor requirements to qualify for the 100% PTC or 30% ITC rate or construction must have started on the facility before January 29, 2023. In addition, the PTC is increased by 10% and the ITC rate is increased by 10 percentage points for facilities that satisfy certain tax credit enhancement requirements. Retrofitted wind and solar generation facilities may qualify for a PTC or an ITC if the cost basis of the new investment is at least 80% of the retrofitted facility&#8217;s total fair value. 

In addition, the IRA expanded the 30% ITC to include storage projects placed in service after 2022 (previously, such projects qualified only if they were connected to and charged by a renewable generation facility that claimed the ITC) as well as certain property with respect to renewable natural gas facilities that are placed in service after 2022 and begin construction before 2025. The 30% ITC to storage projects is subject to the phaseout. The IRA created a PTC of $3/kilogram of green (low emission) hydrogen produced at a facility after 2022 and during the first ten years of commercial operation (or a 30% ITC in lieu of the PTC), provided that construction of the facility begins before 2033. These credits are also subject to certain other requirements. In addition, storage projects and hydrogen facilities claiming an ITC are eligible for a 10 percentage point increase in the ITC rate if the facilities satisfy certain tax credit enhancement requirements. A wind or solar project that provides electricity to a green hydrogen facility may qualify for the PTC or ITC and the hydrogen facility may separately qualify for its own PTC or ITC. 

s 

For taxable years beginning after 2022, renewable energy tax credits generated during the year can be transferred to an unrelated purchaser for cash, providing an additional path, along with sales of differential membership interests, for developers to monetize the value of renewable energy tax credits. 

Other countries, including Canada, provide for incentives like feed-in-tariffs for renewable energy projects. The feed-in-tariffs promote renewable energy investments by offering long-term contracts to renewable energy producers, typically based on the cost of generation of each technology. 

Other Operations 

Gas Infrastructure Business &#8211; At December 31, 2023, NextEra Energy Resources had ownership interests in natural gas pipelines, the most significant of which are discussed below, and in oil and gas shale formations located primarily in the Midwest and South regions of the U.S. 

##TABLE_START Miles of Pipeline Pipeline Location/Route Ownership Total Net Capacity (per day) 

Actual/Expected In-Service 

Dates 

Operational: 

Sabal Trail (a) 

517 Southwestern Alabama to Central Florida 42.5% 0.43 Bcf June 2017 &#8211; May 2020 

Florida Southeast Connection (a) 

169 Central Florida to South Florida 100% 0.64 Bcf June 2017 Under Construction: Mountain Valley Pipeline (b) 

303 Northwestern West Virginia to Southern Virginia 32.8% 

0.66 Bcf 

First Half of 2024 

##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) See Note 15 &#8211; Contracts for a discussion of transportation contracts with FPL. 

(b) See Note 15 &#8211; Contracts for a discussion of a transportation contract with a NextEra Energy Resources subsidiary. 

In December 2023, NEP completed the sale of its ownership interests in a portfolio of natural gas pipelines located in south Texas. 

Rate-Regulated Transmission &#8211; At December 31, 2023, certain entities within the NEER segment had ownership interests in rate-regulated transmission and related facilities. 

##TABLE_START Jurisdiction 

Miles Substations Kilovolt Location Rate Regulator Ownership 

Actual/Expected In-Service 

Dates 

Operational: 

Southwest Power Pool (SPP) 

18 

69 &#8211; 115 

Kansas and Oklahoma 

FERC 

100% 

(a) 

1960 &#8211; 2021 

ERCOT 

11 

345 Texas PUCT 100% 2013 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO) 

&#8211; 230 

Ontario, Canada 

OEB 

48% 

CAISO 

9 

200 (b) &#8211; 230 

California and Nevada 

FERC 

100% 1960 &#8211; 2021 

Other 

5 

161 &#8211; 345 

Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, New Hampshire and New York 

FERC 

100% 

(c) 

1953 - 2022 

Under Construction: 

CAISO 

6 

Nevada 

FERC 

100% 

PJM 

1 

Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia 

FERC 

100% 

SPP 

&#8211; 345 

Kansas, Missouri, New Mexico and Oklahoma 

FERC 

100% 

2024 - 2026 

##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) Includes a 26-mile transmission line and 5 substations, in which NEET owns a 65% interest. 

(b) Direct current 

(c) Includes a substation, in which NEET owns an 88.3% interest. 

Customer Supply &#8211; NEER provides commodities-related products to customers, engages in energy-related commodity marketing and trading activities and includes the operations of a retail electricity provider. Through NextEra Energy Resources subsidiary PMI, NEER: 

&#8226; manages risk associated with fluctuating commodity prices and optimizes the value of NEER's power generation and gas infrastructure production assets through the use of swaps, options, futures and forwards; 

&#8226; sells output from NEER's plants that is not sold under long-term contracts and procures fuel for use by NEER's generation fleet; 

&#8226; provides full energy and capacity requirements to customers; and 

&#8226; markets and trades energy-related commodity products, including power and fuel, as well as marketing and trading services to customers. 

s 

MARKETS AND COMPETITION 

Electricity markets in the U.S. and Canada are regional and diverse in character. All are extensively regulated, and competition in these markets is shaped and constrained by regulation. The nature of the products offered varies based on the specifics of regulation in each region. Generally, in addition to the natural constraints on pricing freedom presented by competition, NEER may also face specific constraints in the form of price caps, or maximum allowed prices, for certain products. NEER's ability to sell the output of its generation facilities may also be constrained by available transmission capacity, which can vary from time to time and can have a significant impact on pricing. 

The degree and nature of competition is different in wholesale markets than in retail markets. A majority of NEER's revenues are derived from sales of energy, capacity, credits and ancillary products under long-term PPAs to customers located in wholesale electricity markets. Wholesale power generation is a capital-intensive, commodity-driven business with numerous industry participants. NEER primarily competes on the basis of price, but believes the green attributes of NEER's generation assets, its track record of completing projects on schedule, its creditworthiness and its ability to offer and manage reliable customized risk solutions to wholesale customers are competitive advantages. Wholesale power generation is a regional business that is highly fragmented relative to many other commodity industries and diverse in terms of industry structure. As such, there is a wide variation in terms of the capabilities, resources, nature and identity of the companies NEER competes with depending on the market. In wholesale markets, customers' needs are met through a variety of means, including long-term bilateral contracts, standardized bilateral products such as full requirements service and customized supply and risk management services. 

In general, U.S. and Canadian electricity markets encompass three classes of services: energy and related energy credits, capacity and ancillary services. Energy services relate to the physical delivery of power; capacity services relate to the availability of MW capacity of a power generation asset; and ancillary services are other services that relate to power generation assets, such as load regulation and spinning and non-spinning reserves. The exact nature of these classes of services is defined in part by regional tariffs. Not all regions have a capacity services class, and the specific definitions of ancillary services vary from region to region. 

RTOs and ISOs exist throughout much of North America to coordinate generation and transmission across wide geographic areas and to run markets. NEER operates in all RTO and ISO jurisdictions. At December 31, 2023, NEER also had generation facilities with a total net generating capacity of approximately 7,944 MW that fall within reliability regions that are not under the jurisdiction of an established RTO or ISO, including 5,743 MW within the Western Electricity Coordinating Council and 2,119 MW within the SERC Reliability Corporation. Although each RTO and ISO may have differing objectives and structures, some benefits of these entities include regional planning, managing transmission congestion, developing larger wholesale markets for energy and capacity, maintaining reliability and facilitating competition among wholesale electricity providers. 

s 

NEER has operations that fall within the following RTOs and ISOs : 

NEER competes in different regions to differing degrees, but in general it seeks to enter into long-term bilateral contracts for the full output of its generation facilities. At December 31, 2023, approximately 94% of NEER's net generating capacity was committed under long-term contracts. Where long-term contracts are not in effect, NEER sells the output of its facilities into daily spot markets. In such cases, NEER will frequently enter into shorter term bilateral contracts, typically of less than three years duration, to hedge the price risk associated with selling into a daily spot market. Such bilateral contracts, which may be hedges either for physical delivery or for financial (pricing) offset, serve to protect a portion of the revenue that NEER expects to derive from the associated generation facility. Contracts that serve the economic purpose of hedging some portion of the expected revenue of a generation facility but are not recorded as hedges under GAAP are referred to as &#8220;non-qualifying hedges&#8221; for adjusted earnings purposes. See Management's Discussion &#8211; Overview &#8211; Adjusted Earnings. 

Certain facilities within the NEER wind and solar generation portfolio produce RECs and other environmental attributes which are typically sold along with the energy from the plants under long-term contracts, or may be sold separately from wind and solar generation not sold under long-term contracts. The purchasing party is solely entitled to the reporting rights and ownership of the environmental attributes. 

While the majority of NEER's revenue is derived from the output of its generation facilities, NEER is also an active competitor in several regions in the wholesale full requirements business and in providing structured and customized power and fuel products and services to a variety of customers. In the full requirements service, typically, the supplier agrees to meet the customer's needs for a full range of products for every hour of the day, at a fixed price, for a predetermined period of time, thereby assuming the risk of fluctuations in the customer's volume requirements. 

Expanded competition in a frequently changing regulatory environment presents both opportunities and risks for NEER. Opportunities exist for the selective acquisition of generation assets and for the construction and operation of efficient facilities that can sell power in competitive markets. NEER seeks to reduce its market risk by having a diversified portfolio by fuel type and location, as well as by contracting for the future sale of a significant amount of the electricity output of its facilities. 

s 

NEER REGULATION 

The energy markets in which NEER operates are subject to domestic and foreign regulation, as the case may be, including local, state and federal regulation, and other specific rules. 

At December 31, 2023 , essentially all of NEER's generation facilities located in the U.S. have received exempt wholesale generator status as defined under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005. Exempt wholesale generators own or operate a facility exclusively to sell electricity to wholesale customers. They are barred from selling electricity directly to retail customers. While projects with exempt wholesale generator status are exempt from various restrictions, each project must still comply with other federal, state and local laws, including, but not limited to, those regarding siting, construction, operation, licensing, pollution abatement and other environmental laws. 

Additionally, most of the NEER facilities located in the U.S. are subject to FERC regulations and market rules and the NERC's mandatory reliability standards, all of its facilities are subject to environmental laws and the EPA's environmental regulations, and its nuclear facilities are also subject to the jurisdiction of the NRC. See FPL &#8211; FPL Regulation for additional discussion of FERC, NERC, NRC and EPA regulations. Rates of NEER's rate-regulated transmission businesses are set by regulatory bodies as noted in Clean Energy and Other Operations &#8211; Other Operations &#8211; Rate-Regulated Transmission. With the exception of facilities located in ERCOT, the FERC has jurisdiction over various aspects of NEER's business in the U.S., including the oversight and investigation of competitive wholesale energy markets, regulation of the transmission and sale of natural gas, and oversight of environmental matters related to natural gas projects and major electricity policy initiatives. The PUCT has jurisdiction, including the regulation of rates and services, oversight of competitive markets, and enforcement of statutes and rules, over NEER facilities located in ERCOT. 

Certain entities within the NEER segment and their affiliates are also subject to federal and provincial or regional regulations in Canada related to energy operations, energy markets and environmental standards. In Canada, activities related to owning and operating wind and solar projects and participating in wholesale and retail energy markets are regulated at the provincial level. In Ontario, for example, electric generation facilities must be licensed by the OEB and may also be required to complete registrations and maintain market participant status with the IESO, in which case they must agree to be bound by and comply with the provisions of the market rules for the Ontario electricity market as well as the mandatory reliability standards of the NERC. 

In addition, NEER is subject to environmental laws and regulations as described in the NEE Environmental Matters section below. In order to better anticipate potential regulatory changes, NEER continues to actively evaluate and participate in regional market redesigns of existing operating rules for the integration of renewable energy resources and for the purchase and sale of energy commodities. 

NEER HUMAN CAPITAL 

NEER had approximately 7,300 employees at December 31, 2023. NEER has collective bargaining agreements with the IBEW, the Utility Workers Union of Amer ica and the Security Police and Fire Professionals of America, which collectively repr esent approximately 6% of NEER's employees. The collective bargaining agreements have approximately two- to four-year terms and expire between June 2024 and December 2025. 

NEE ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS 

NEE and its subsidiaries, including FPL, are subject to environmental laws and regulations, including extensive federal, state and local environmental statutes, rules and regulations relating to, among others, air quality, water quality and usage, waste management, wildlife protection and historical resources, for the siting, construction and ongoing operations of their facilities. The U.S. government and certain states and regions, as well as the Government of Canada and its provinces, have taken and continue to take certain actions, such as proposing and finalizing regulations or setting targets or goals, regarding the regulation and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and the increase of renewable energy generation. On May 23, 2023, the EPA published a proposed rule that would restrict carbon emissions for both new and existing fossil power plants that meet specific criteria. FPL expects any costs to comply with the final rule, if enacted, to qualify for recovery under the environmental clause, subject to FPSC approval. The environmental laws in the U.S., including, among others, the Endangered Species Act (ESA), the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (BGEPA), provide for the protection of numerous species, including endangered species and/or their habitats, migratory birds, bats and eagles. In 2023, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service listed the northern long-eared bat as endangered, with two more species expected to be listed in 2024 and 2025. The environmental laws in Canada, including, among others, the Species at Risk Act, provide for the recovery of wildlife species that are endangered or threatened and the management of species of special concern. Complying with these environmental laws and regulations could result in, among other things, changes in the design and operation of, and additional costs associated with, existing facilities and changes or delays in the location, design, construction and operation of new facilities. Failure to comply could result in fines, penalties, criminal sanctions or injunctions. NEE's rate-regulated subsidiaries expect to seek recovery for compliance costs associated with any new environmental laws and regulations, which recovery for FPL would be through the environmental clause. 

s 

WEBSITE ACCESS TO SEC FILINGS 

NEE and FPL make their SEC filings, including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and any amendments to those reports, available free of charge on NEE's internet website, www.nexteraenergy.com, as soon as reasonably practicable after those documents are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. The information and materials available on NEE's website (or any of its subsidiaries' or affiliates' websites) are not incorporated by reference into this combined Form 10-K. 

INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS (a) 

##TABLE_START Name Age Position Effective Date Robert Coffey 60 Executive Vice President, Nuclear Division and Chief Nuclear Officer of NEE Vice President and Chief Nuclear Officer of FPL June 14, 2021 June 15, 2021 Terrell Kirk Crews II 45 Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer of NEE Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer of FPL March 1, 2022 

Nicole Daggs 

Executive Vice President, Human Resources and Corporate Services of NEE 

Executive Vice President, Human Resources and Corporate Services of FPL 

January 1, 2024 

Michael H. Dunne 48 Treasurer of NEE Treasurer of FPL Assistant Secretary of NEE January 1, 2023 John W. Ketchum 53 Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of NEE Chairman of FPL 

July 29, 2022 

February 15, 2023 

Rebecca J. Kujawa 48 President and Chief Executive Officer of NextEra Energy Resources March 1, 2022 Mark Lemasney 48 Executive Vice President, Power Generation Division of NEE Executive Vice President, Power Generation Division of FPL January 1, 2023 James M. May 47 Vice President, Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of NEE March 1, 2019 Armando Pimentel, Jr. 61 President and Chief Executive Officer of FPL February 15, 2023 Ronald R. Reagan 55 Executive Vice President, Engineering, Construction and Integrated Supply Chain of NEE Vice President, Engineering and Construction of FPL January 1, 2020 March 1, 2019 Charles E. Sieving 51 

Executive Vice President, Chief Legal, Environmental and Federal Regulatory Affairs Officer of NEE 

Executive Vice President of FPL 

May 18, 2023 

January 1, 2009 

##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) Information is as of February 16, 2024. Executive officers are elected annually by, and serve at the pleasure of, their respective boards of directors. Except as noted below, each officer has held his/her present position for five years or more and his/her employment history is continuous. Mr. Coffey served as Vice President, Nuclear for FPL from May 2019 to June 2021 and was Regional Vice President for FPL's southern fleet from January 2018 to May 2019. Mr. Crews served as Vice President, Business Management of NextEra Energy Resources from March 2019 to February 2022 and was Vice President, Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of NEE from September 2016 until March 2019 . Mrs. Daggs served as Vice President, Human Resources for FPL from April 2018 to December 2023. Mr. Dunne served as Vice President Finance of NEE from April 2022 to December 2022. He was previously Managing Director, Global Energy &#38; Power Investment Banking for Bank of America from January 2012 to March 2022. Mr. Ketchum served as President and Chief Executive Officer of NEE from March 2022 to July 2022. He previously served as President and Chief Executive Officer of NextEra Energy Resources from March 2019 to February 2022 and Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer of NEE and FPL from March 2016 to February 2019. Mrs. Kujawa served as Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer of NEE and FPL from February 2019 to February 2022 and Vice President, Business Management of NextEra Energy Resources from March 2012 to February 2019. Mr. Lemasney served as Vice President of Power Generation Division Engineering and Operations Support Services of NEE from November 2018 to December 2022. Mr. May served as Controller of NextEra Energy Resources from April 2015 to February 2019. Mr. Pimentel serves as a member of the Board of Directors of Ameriprise Financial, Inc. since September 2022 and previously served as President and Chief Executive Officer of NextEra Energy Resources from October 2011 to March 2019. Mr. Reagan served as Vice President, Engineering and Construction of NEE from November 2018 to December 2019. Mr. Sieving previously served as Executive Vice President &#38; General Counsel of NEE from December 2008 to May 2023. 

s 



Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations:
 Item 7. Management&#8217;s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 

OVERVIEW 

NEE&#8217;s operating performance is driven primarily by the operations of its two principal businesses, FPL, which serves approximately 5.9 million customer accounts in Florida and is one of the largest electric utilities in the U.S., and NEER, which together with affiliated entities is the world's largest generator of renewable energy from the wind and sun based on 2023 MWh produced on a net generation basis, as well as a world leader in battery storage . The table below presents net income (loss) attributable to NEE and earnings (loss) per s hare attributable to NEE, assuming dilution, by reportable segment, FPL and NEER. Corporate and Other is primarily comprised of the operating results of other business activities, as well as other income and expense items, including interest expense, and eliminating entries, and may include the net effect of rounding. See Note 16 for additional segment information. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein and all comparisons are with the corresponding items in the prior year. 

##TABLE_START Net Income (Loss) Attributable to NEE Earnings (Loss) Per Share Attributable to NEE, Assuming Dilution Years Ended December 31, Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 2021 2023 2022 2021 (millions) 

FPL 

$ 4,552 &#160; $ 3,701 $ 3,206 $ 2.24 &#160; $ 1.87 $ 1.63 

NEER (a) 

3,558 &#160; 285 599 1.75 &#160; 0.14 0.30 

Corporate and Other 

(800) 161 (232) (0.39) 0.09 (0.12) NEE $ 7,310 &#160; $ 4,147 $ 3,573 $ 3.60 &#160; $ 2.10 $ 1.81 ##TABLE_END ______________________ 

(a) NEER&#8217;s results reflect an allocation of interest expense from NEECH based on a deemed capital structure of 70% debt and differential membership interests sold by NextEra Energy Resources' subsidiaries. 

For the five years ended December 31, 2023, NEE delivered a total shareholder return of approximately 56.4%, compared to the S&#38;P 500&#8217;s 107.2% return, the S&#38;P 500 Utilities' 41.0% return and the Dow Jones U.S. Electricity's 39.6% return. The historical stock performance of NEE's common stock shown in the performance graph below is not necessarily indicative of future stock price performance. 

s 

Adjusted Earnings 

NEE prepares its financial statements under GAAP. However, management uses earnings adjusted for certain items (adjusted earnings), a non-GAAP financial measure, internally for financial planning, analysis of performance, reporting of results to the Board of Directors and as an input in determining performance-based compensation under NEE&#8217;s employee incentive compensation plans. NEE also uses adjusted earnings when communicating its financial results and earnings outlook to analysts and investors. NEE &#8217;s management believes that adjusted earnings provide a more meaningful representation of NEE's fundamental earnings power. Although these amounts are properly reflected in the determination of net income under GAAP, management believes that the amount and/or nature of such items make period to period comparisons of operations difficult and potentially confusing. Adjusted earnings do not represent a substitute for net income, as prepared under GAAP. 

The following table provides details of the after-tax adjustments to net income considered in computing NEE's adjusted earnings discussed above. 

##TABLE_START Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 2021 (millions) Net gains (losses) associated with non-qualifying hedge activity (a) 

$ 1,497 &#160; $ (696) $ (1,576) Differential membership interests-related &#8211; NEER 

$ (49) $ (87) $ (98) 

NEP investment gains, net &#8211; NEER (b) 

$ (963) $ 186 $ 27 

Gain on disposal of a business (c) 

$ 306 &#160; $ &#8212; $ &#8212; Change in unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities held in NEER's nuclear decommissioning funds and OTTI, net &#8211; NEER 

$ 116 &#160; $ (324) $ 199 

Impairment charges related to investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline &#8211; NEER (d) 

$ (38) $ (674) $ &#8212; ##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) For 2023, 2022 and 2021, approximately $1,729 million of gains, $1,257 million of losses and $1,735 million of losses, respectively, are included in NEER's net income; the balance is included in Corporate and Other. The change in non-qualifying hedge activity is primarily attributable to changes in forward power and natural gas prices, interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates, as well as the reversal of previously recognized unrealized mark-to-market gains or losses as the underlying transactions were realized. 

(b) See Note 4 &#8211; Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements for a discussion of an impairment charge related to the investment in NEP in 2023. 

(c) Approximately $300 million of gains are included in FPL's net income; the balance is included in NEER. See Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests for a discussion of the sale of FPL's ownership interest in its Florida City Gas business (FCG). 

(d) See Note 4 &#8211; Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements for a discussion of the impairment charge in 2022 related to the investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline, LLC (Mountain Valley Pipeline). 

NEE segregates into two categories unrealized mark-to-market gains and losses and timing impacts related to derivative transactions. The first category, referred to as non-qualifying hedges, represents certain energy derivative, interest rate derivative and foreign currency transactions entered into as economic hedges, which do not meet the requirements for hedge accounting, or for which hedge accounting treatment is not elected or has been discontinued. Changes in the fair value of those transactions are marked to market and reported in the consolidated statements of income, resulting in earnings volatility because the economic offset to certain of the positions are generally not marked to market. As a consequence, NEE's net income reflects only the movement in one part of economically-linked transactions. For example, a gain (loss) in the non-qualifying hedge category for certain energy derivatives is offset by decreases (increases) in the fair value of related physical asset positions in the portfolio or contracts, which are not marked to market under GAAP. For this reason, NEE's management views results expressed excluding the impact of the non-qualifying hedges as a meaningful measure of current period performance. The second category, referred to as trading activities, which is included in adjusted earnings, represents the net unrealized effect of actively traded positions entered into to take advantage of expected market price movements and all other commodity hedging activities. At FPL, substantially all changes in the fair value of energy derivative transactions are deferred as a regulatory asset or liability until the contracts are settled, and, upon settlement, any gains or losses are passed through the fuel clause. See Note 3. 

2023 Summary 

Net income attributable to NEE for 2023 was higher than 2022 by $3,163 million, or $1.50 per share, assuming dilution, due to higher results at NEER and FPL, partly offset by lower results at Corporate and Other. 

FPL's net income increased by $851 million in 2023 primarily driven by continued investments in plant in service and other property and the gain on sale of FPL's ownership interest in the FCG business. 

NEER's results increased in 2023 primarily driven by favorable non-qualifying hedge activity compared to 2022, higher earnings from new investments, lower impairment charges related to its investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline, partly offset by the OTTI impairment related to the investment in NEP. In 2023, NEER added approximately 1,651 MW of new wind generating capacity and 2,073 MW of solar generating capacity and increased its backlog of contracted renewable development projects. 

Corporate and Other's results in 2023 decreased primarily due to unfavorable non-qualifying hedge activity. 

s 

NEE and its subsidiaries require funds to support and grow their businesses. These funds are primarily provided by cash flows from operations, borrowings or issuances of short- and long-term debt and, from time to time, issuances of equity securities, proceeds from differential membership investors, the sale of tax credits and sales of assets to NEP or third parties. See Liquidity and Capital Resources. 

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 

Net income attributable to NEE for 2023 was $7.31 billion compared to $4.15 billion in 2022. In 2023, net income attributable to NEE increased primarily due to higher results at NEER and FPL, partly offset by lower results at Corporate and Other. The comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021 are included in Management's Discussion in NEE's and FPL's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 . 

In September 2022, subsidiaries of NextEra Energy Resources sold to a NEP subsidiary a 67% controlling ownership interest in a battery storage facility with storage capacity of 230 MW. In December 2022, subsidiaries of NextEra Energy Resources sold (i) a 49% controlling ownership interest in three wind generation facilities and one solar plus battery facility with a total generating capacity of 1,437 MW and 65 MW of battery storage capacity, two of which facilities were under construction and achieved commercial operations in 2023, and (ii) their 100% ownership interest in three wind generation facilities with a total generating capacity of 347 MW to a NEP subsidiary. See Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests. 

In March 2023, a wholly owned subsidiary of NextEra Energy Resources acquired a portfolio of renewable energy projects as well as the related service provider. See Note 6 &#8211; RNG Acquisition. In June 2023, subsidiaries of NextEra Energy Resources sold to a NEP subsidiary their 100% ownership interests in five wind generation facilities and three solar generation facilities with a total generating capacity of 688 MW. In November 2023, FPL sold its ownership interests in FCG. See Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests. 

NEE's effective income tax rate for 2023 and 2022 was approximately 14% and 15%, respectively. The rates for both years reflect the impact of renewable energy tax credits. See Note 5. In August 2022, the IRA was enacted which significantly expanded tax incentives for clean energy (see Item 1. Business &#8211; NEER &#8211; Clean Energy and Other Operations &#8211; Clean Energy &#8211; Policy Incentives for Renewable Energy Projects). 

FPL: Results of Operations 

FPL obtains its operating revenues primarily from the sale of electricity to retail customers at rates established by the FPSC through b ase rates and cost recovery clause mechanisms. FPL&#8217;s net income for 2023 and 2022 was $4,552 million and $3,701 million, respectively, representing an increase of $851 million. The increase was primarily driven by higher earnings from investments in plant in service and other property and the gain on sale of FPL's ownership interest in the FCG business. Such investments grew FPL's average rate base by approximately $6.9 billion in 2023 and reflect, among other things, solar generation additions, ongoing transmission and distribution additions, and the addition of the 1,246 MW Dania Beach Clean Energy Center which was placed in service on May 31, 2022. 

During 2023, the FPSC approved FPL's request to begin recovering eligible storm costs of approximately $1.3 billion, primarily related to surcharges for Hurricanes Ian and Nicole which impacted FPL's service area in 2022. FPL implemented an interim storm restoration charge in April 2023 for eligible storm restoration costs. See Note 1 &#8211; Storm Funds, Storm Reserves and Storm Cost Recovery. 

The use of reserve amortization is permitted by the 2021 rate agreement. See Item 1. Business &#8211; FPL &#8211; FPL Regulation &#8211; FPL Electric Rate Regulation &#8211; Base Rates &#8211; Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025 for additional information on the 2021 rate agreement. In order to earn a targeted regulatory ROE, subject to limitations associated with the 2021 rate agreement, reserve amortization is calculated using a trailing thirteen-month average of retail rate base and capital structure in conjunction with the trailing twelve months regulatory retail base net operating income, which primarily includes the retail base portion of base and other revenues, net of O&#38;M, depreciation and amortization, interest and tax expenses. In general, the net impact of these income statement line items must be adjusted, in part, by reserve amortization to earn the targeted regulatory ROE. In certain periods, reserve amortization is reversed so as not to exceed the targeted regulatory ROE. The drivers of FPL's net income not reflected in the reserve amortization calculation typically include wholesale and transmission service revenues and expenses, cost recovery clause revenues and expenses, AFUDC &#8211; equity and revenue and costs not recoverable from retail customers. FPL recorded reserve amortization of approximately $227 million in 2023 and a one-time reserve amortization adjustment of $114 million in 2022. See Depreciation and Amortization Expense below. FPL's regulatory ROE for 2023 and 2022 was approximately 11.80% and 11.74%, respectively. 

On September 28, 2023, the Florida Supreme Court ruled on the appeal of the FPSC&#8217;s final order regarding FPL&#8217;s 2021 rate agreement and remanded the FPSC's order back to the FPSC. See Note 1 &#8211; Base Rates Effective January 2022 through December 2025. 

s 

During 2023, operating revenues increased $1,083 million primarily related to an increase in storm cost recovery revenues as discussed in Cost Recovery Clauses below. 

Retail Base 

FPL&#8217;s retail base revenues for 2023 and 2022 reflect the 2021 rate agreement. Retail base revenues increased approximately $618 million during the year ended December 31, 2023 primarily related to new retail base rates under the 2021 rate agreement. Retail revenues were also impacted by an increase of approximately 1.2% in the average number of customer accounts, partly offset by a decrease of 0.6% in the average usage per retail customer. See Note 1 &#8211; Rate Regulation. 

Cost Recovery Clauses 

Revenues from fuel and other cost recovery clauses and pass-through costs, such as franchise fees, revenue taxes and storm-related surcharges, are largely a pass-through of costs. Such revenues also include a return on investment allowed to be recovered through the cost recovery clauses on certain assets, primarily related to certain solar, environmental projects, storm protection plan investments and the unamortized balance of the regulatory asset associated with FPL's acquisition of certain generation facilities. See Item 1. Business &#8211; FPL &#8211; FPL Regulation &#8211; FPL Electric Rate Regulation &#8211; Cost Recovery Clauses. Under-recovery or over-recovery of cost recovery clause and other pass-through costs (deferred clause and franchise expenses and revenues) can significantly affect NEE's and FPL's operating cash flows. The 2023 net decrease in under-recovery of cost recovery clauses impacting FPL's operating cash flows was approximately $1,104 million, primarily related to lower fuel prices and recovery of fuel cost incurred in 2022, but recovered in rates in 2023. 

The increase in operating revenues in 2023 reflects higher storm cost recovery revenues of approximately $1,117 million primarily associated with Hurricanes Ian and Nicole, as discussed above. The increase in operating revenues in 2023 were partly offset by decreases in fuel cost recovery revenues of approximately $714 million primarily as a result of lower fuel and energy prices. In 2023 and 2022, cost recovery clauses contributed approximately $369 million and $261 million, respectively, to FPL&#8217;s net income. 

Other Items Impacting FPL's Consolidated Statements of Income 

Fuel, Purchase Power and Interchange Expense 

Fuel, purchased power and interchange expense decreased $927 million in 2023 primarily related to lower fuel and energy prices. 

Depreciation and Amortization Expense 

The major components of FPL&#8217;s depreciation and amortization expense are as follows: 

##TABLE_START Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 (millions) 

Reserve amortization recorded under the 2021 rate agreement 

$ (227) $ &#8212; One-time reserve adjustment recorded under the 2021 rate agreement &#8212; &#160; (114) Other depreciation and amortization recovered under base rates (excluding reserve amortization) and other 

2,468 &#160; 2,404 Depreciation and amortization primarily recovered under cost recovery clauses and storm-recovery cost amortization 

1,548 &#160; 405 Total $ 3,789 &#160; $ 2,695 ##TABLE_END

Depreciation expense increased $1,094 million during 2023 primarily reflecting amortization of deferred storm costs expenses primarily associated with Hurricanes Ian and Nicole as discussed above, of approximately $1,114 million, partly offset by the impact of reserve amortization. In 2022, FPL recorded a one-time reserve amortization adjustment of approximately $114 million as required under the 2021 rate agreement, 50% of which was used to reduce the capital recovery regulatory asset balance and the other 50% to increase the storm reserve regulatory liability. Reserve amortization, or reversal of such amortization, reflects adjustments to accrued asset removal costs provided under the 2021 rate agreement in order to achieve the targeted regulatory ROE. Reserve amortization is recorded as either an increase or decrease to accrued asset removal costs which is reflected in noncurrent regulatory assets on NEE's and FPL's consolidated balance sheets. At December 31, 2023, approximately $1,223 million of reserve amortization remains available under the 2021 rate agreement. 

Gains on Disposal of Businesses/Assets &#8211; net 

In 2023, gains on disposal of businesses/assets &#8211; net primarily relate to the sale of ownership interests in the FCG business. See Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests. 

Interest Expense 

Interest expense increased $346 million primarily due to higher average interest rates and higher average debt balances. 

s 

NEER: Results of Operations 

NEER owns, develops, constructs, manages and operates electric generation facilities in wholesale energy markets in the U.S. and Canada and also includes assets and investments in other businesses with a clean energy focus, such as battery storage and renewable fuels. NEER also provides full energy and capacity requirements services, engages in power and fuel marketing and trading activities, owns, develops, constructs and operates rate-regulated transmission facilities and transmission lines and invests in natural gas, natural gas liquids and oil production and pipeline infrastructure assets. NEER&#8217;s net income less net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests for 2023 and 2022 was $3,558 million and $285 million, respectively, resulting in an increase in 2023 of $3,273 million. The primary drivers, on an after-tax basis, of the change are in the following table. 

##TABLE_START Increase (Decrease) From Prior Period Year Ended December 31, 2023 (millions) 

New investments (a) 

$ 714 &#160; 

Existing clean energy (a) 

(214) 

Gas infrastructure (a) 

(21) 

Customer supply (b) 

334 &#160; 

NEET (a) 

(2) Other, including interest expense, corporate general and administrative expenses and other investment income (451) 

Change in non-qualifying hedge activity (c) 

2,986 &#160; Change in unrealized gains/losses on equity securities held in nuclear decommissioning funds and OTTI, net (c) 

440 &#160; 

NEP investment gains, net (c) 

(1,149) 

Impairment charges related to investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline (c)(d) 

636 &#160; Change in net income less net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests $ 3,273 &#160; ##TABLE_END ______________________ 

(a) Reflects after-tax project contributions, including the net effect of deferred income taxes and other benefits associated with renewable energy tax credits for wind, solar and storage projects, as applicable (see Note 1 &#8211; Income Taxes and &#8211; Noncontrolling Interests and Note 5), but excludes allocation of interest expense and corporate general and administrative expenses except for an allocated credit support charge related to guarantees issued to conduct business activities. Results from projects, pipelines and rate-regulated transmission facilities and transmission lines are included in new investments during the first twelve months of operation or ownership. Project results, including repowered wind projects, are included in existing clean energy, pipeline results are included in gas infrastructure and rate-regulated transmission facilities and transmission lines are included in NEET beginning with the thirteenth month of operation or ownership. 

(b) Excludes allocation of interest expense and corporate general and administrative expenses except for an allocated credit support charge related to guarantees issued to conduct business activities. 

(c) See Overview &#8211; Adjusted Earnings for additional information. 

(d) See Note 4 &#8211; Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements for a discussion of the first quarter 2022 impairment charge related to the investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline. 

New Investments 

Results from new investments in 2023 increased primarily due to higher earnings related to new wind and solar generation and battery storage facilities that entered service during or after 2022. 

Other Factors 

Supplemental to the primary drivers of the changes in NEER's results discussed above, the discussion below describes changes in certain line items set forth in NEE's consolidated statements of income as they relate to NEER. 

Operating Revenues 

Operating revenues for 2023 increased $5,952 million primarily due to: 

&#8226; the impact of non-qualifying commodity hedges due primarily to changes in energy prices (approximately $2,529 million of gains during 2023 compared to $2,670 million of losses for 2022), 

&#8226; net increases in revenues of $647 million from the customer supply and gas infrastructure businesses, 

&#8226; revenues from new investments of $390 million, and 

&#8226; higher revenues from NEET of $84 million, 

partly offset by, 

&#8226; lower revenues from existing clean energy assets of $371 million primarily due to lower wind revenues primarily reflecting lower wind resource. 

Operating Expenses &#8211; net 

Operating expenses &#8211; net for 2023 increased $566 million primarily due to increases of $342 million in O&#38;M expenses and $287 million in depreciation and amortization expenses, partly offset by decreases of $41 million in fuel, purchased power and interchange expenses. The increases were primarily associated with growth across the NEER businesses. 

Gains on Disposal of Businesses/Assets &#8211; net 

In 2022, gains on disposal of businesses/assets &#8211; net primarily relate to the sale of ownership interests in wind, solar and battery 

s 

storage projects to NEP and the resolution of a contingency related to the December 2021 sale of ownership interests in wind and solar projects. See Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests. 

Interest Expense 

NEER's interest expense for 2023 increased $1,001 million primarily reflecting approximately $617 million of unfavorable impacts related to changes in the fair value of interest rate derivative instruments as well as higher interest expense primarily due to higher average interest rates and higher average debt balances. 

Equity in Earnings (Losses) of Equity Method Investees 

NEER recognized $649 million of equity in losses of equity method investees in 2023 compared to $202 million of equity in earnings of equity method investees for the prior year. The decrease in 2023 primarily reflects an impairment charge of approximately $1.2 billion ($0.9 billion after tax) related to the investment in NEP and a decrease in equity in earnings (losses) of NEP recorded in 2023 primarily due to unfavorable impacts related to changes in the fair value of interest rate derivative instruments, partly offset by the absence of impairment charges of approximately $0.8 billion ($0.6 billion after tax) related to the investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline recorded in the first quarter of 2022 (see Note 4 &#8211; Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements). 

Change in Unrealized Gains (Losses) on Equity Securities Held in NEER's Nuclear Decommissioning Funds &#8211; net 

In 2023, the changes in the fair value of equity securities in NEER's nuclear decommissioning funds related to favorable market conditions in 2023 compared to unfavorable market conditions in the prior year. 

Income Taxes 

NEER's effective income tax rate for 2023 and 2022 was approximately 7% and 39%, respectively, and is primarily based on the composition of pretax income in 2023 and pretax loss in 2022 as well as the impact of renewable energy tax credits. PTCs from wind and solar projects and ITCs from solar, battery storage and certain wind projects are included in NEER&#8217;s earnings. PTCs are recognized as wind and solar energy is generated and sold based on a per kWh rate prescribed in applicable federal and state statutes. See Note 1 &#8211; Income Taxes for a discussion of renewable energy tax credits, Note 5 and Note 16. 

Corporate and Other: Results of Operations 

Corporate and Other is primarily comprised of the operating res ults of other business activities, as well as corporate interest income and expenses. Corporate and Other allocates a portion of NEECH's corporate interest expense to NextEra Energy Resources. Interest expense is allocated based on a deemed capital structure of 70% debt and differential membership interests sold by NextEra Energy Resources' subsidiaries. 

Corporate and Other's results decreased $961 million during 2023 primarily due to unfavorable after-tax impacts of approximately $793 million, as compared to the prior year, related to non-qualifying hedge activity as a result of changes in the fair value of interest rate derivative instruments as well as higher average interest rates and higher average debt balances. 

LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 

NEE and its subsidiaries require funds to support and grow their businesses. These funds are used for, among other things, working capital (see Note 1 &#8211; Storm Funds, Storm Reserves and Storm Cost Recovery ), capital expenditures (see Note 15 &#8211; Commitments), investments in or acquisitions of assets and businesses (see Note 6), payment of maturing debt and related derivative obligations (see Note 13 and Note 3) and, from time to time, redemption or repurchase of outstanding debt or equity securities. It is anticipated that these requirements will be satisfied through a combination of cash flows from operations, short- and long-term borrowings, the issuance of short- and long-term debt (see Note 13) and, from time to time, equity securities, proceeds from differential membership investors, the sale of renewable energy tax credits (see Note 1 - Income Taxes) and sales of assets to NEP or third parties (see Note 1 &#8211; Disposal of Businesses/Assets and Sale of Noncontrolling Ownership Interests) , consistent with NEE&#8217;s and FPL&#8217;s objective of maintaining, on a long-term basis, a capital structure that will support a strong investment grade credit rating. NEE, FPL and NEECH rely on access to credit and capital markets as significant sources of liquidity for capital requirements and other operations that are not satisfied by operating cash flows. The inability of NEE, FPL and NEECH to maintain their current credit ratings could affect their ability to raise short- and long-term capital, their cost of capital and the execution of their respective financing strategies, and could require the posting of additional collateral under certain agreements. 

In October 2015, NEE authorized a program to purchase, from time to time, up to $150 million of common units representing limited partner interests in NEP. Under the program, purchases may be made in amounts, at prices and at such times as NEE or its subsidiaries deem appropriate, all subject to market conditions and other considerations. The purchases may be made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. Any purchases will be made in such quantities, at such prices, in such manner and on such terms and conditions as determined by NEE or its subsidiaries in their discretion, based on factors such as market and business conditions, applicable legal requirements and other factors. The common unit purchase program does not require NEE to acquire any specific number of common units and may be modified or terminated by NEE at any time. The purpose of the program is not to cause NEP&#8217;s common units to be delisted from the New York Stock Exchange or to cause the common units to be deregistered with the SEC. As of December 31, 2023, the dollar value of units that may yet be purchased by NEE under this program was $114 million. At December 31, 2023, NEE owned a noncontrolling general partner interest in NEP and beneficially owned approximately 52.6% of NEP&#8217;s voting power. 

s 

Cash Flows 

NEE's sources and uses of cash for 2023, 2022 and 2021 were as follows: 

##TABLE_START Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 2021 (millions) Sources of cash: Cash flows from operating activities $ 11,301 &#160; $ 8,262 $ 7,553 Issuances of long-term debt, including premiums and discounts 13,857 &#160; 13,856 16,683 Proceeds from differential membership investors 2,745 &#160; 4,158 2,779 Proceeds from the sale of Florida City Gas business 924 &#160; &#8212; &#8212; Sale of independent power and other investments of NEER 1,883 &#160; 1,564 2,761 Issuances of common stock/equity units &#8211; net 4,514 &#160; 1,460 14 Net increase in commercial paper and other short-term debt 2,308 &#160; 957 &#8212; Payments from related parties under a cash sweep and credit support agreement &#8211; net 1,213 &#160; 240 47 Proceeds from sale of noncontrolling interests &#8212; &#160; &#8212; 65 Other sources &#8211; net 

&#8212; &#160; 89 40 Total sources of cash 38,745 &#160; 30,586 29,942 Uses of cash: Capital expenditures, independent power and other investments and nuclear fuel purchases (25,113) (19,283) (16,077) Retirements of long-term debt (7,978) (4,525) (9,594) Net decrease in commercial paper and other short-term debt &#8212; &#160; &#8212; (426) Dividends on common stock (3,782) (3,352) (3,024) Other uses &#8211; net 

(1,889) (1,294) (1,052) Total uses of cash (38,762) (28,454) (30,173) Effects of currency translation on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (4) (7) 1 Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash $ (21) $ 2,125 $ (230) ##TABLE_END

For significant financing activity that occurred subsequent to December 31, 2023, see Note 13. 

NEE's primary capital requirements are for expanding and enhancing FPL's electric system and generation facilities to continue to provide reliable service to meet customer electricity demands and for funding NEER's investments in independent power and other projects. See Note 15 &#8211; Commitments for estimated capital expenditures in 2024 through 2028. 

The following table provides a summary of capital investments for 2023 , 2022 and 2021 . 

##TABLE_START Years Ended December 31, 2023 2022 2021 (millions) FPL: Generation: New 

$ 3,163 &#160; $ 2,079 $ 1,046 Existing 

1,441 &#160; 1,804 1,531 Transmission and distribution 4,292 &#160; 4,553 4,495 Nuclear fuel 98 &#160; 118 159 General and other 688 &#160; 581 878 Other, primarily change in accrued property additions and exclusion of AFUDC &#8211; equity 

(282) 50 (539) Total 

9,400 &#160; 9,185 7,570 NEER: Wind 4,793 &#160; 3,481 3,777 Solar (includes solar plus battery storage projects) 4,980 &#160; 2,869 2,011 Other clean energy 2,781 &#160; 827 332 Nuclear (includes nuclear fuel) 

228 &#160; 214 241 Natural gas pipelines 524 &#160; 236 229 Other gas infrastructure 1,575 &#160; 1,215 669 Rate-regulated transmission (2021 includes an acquisition, see Note 6 &#8211; Gridliance) 317 &#160; 431 980 Other 454 &#160; 372 124 Total 

15,652 &#160; 9,645 8,363 Corporate and Other 61 &#160; 453 144 Total capital expenditures, independent power and other investments and nuclear fuel purchases $ 25,113 &#160; $ 19,283 $ 16,077 ##TABLE_END

s 

Liquidity 

At December 31, 2023, NEE's total net available liquidity was approximately $12.2 billion. The table below provides the components of FPL's and NEECH's net available liquidity at December 31, 2023. 

##TABLE_START Maturity Date FPL NEECH Total FPL NEECH (millions) 

Syndicated revolving credit facilities (a) 

$ 3,420 $ 10,739 $ 14,159 2025 &#8211; 2028 

2024 &#8211; 2028 

Issued letters of credit (3) (593) (596) 3,417 10,146 13,563 

Bilateral revolving credit facilities (b) 

580 1,350 1,930 2024 &#8211; 2025 

2024 &#8211; 2026 

Borrowings (b) 

(255) &#8212; (255) 325 1,350 1,675 

Letter of credit facilities (c) 

&#8212; 3,530 3,530 2024 &#8211; 2026 

Issued letters of credit &#8212; (2,797) (2,797) &#8212; 733 733 Subtotal 3,742 12,229 15,971 Cash and cash equivalents 57 2,631 2,688 Commercial paper and other short-term borrowings outstanding (2,629) (2,276) (4,905) Amounts due to related parties under the CSCS agreement (see Note 8) &#8212; (1,511) (1,511) Net available liquidity $ 1,170 $ 11,073 $ 12,243 ##TABLE_END

______________________ 

( a) Provide for the funding of loans up to the amount of the credit facility and the issuance of letters of credit up to $3,200 million ($450 million for FPL and $2,750 million for NEECH). The entire amount of the credit facilities is available for general corporate purposes and to provide additional liquidity in the event of a loss to the companies&#8217; or their subsidiaries&#8217; operating facilities (including, in the case of FPL, a transmission and distribution property loss). FPL&#8217;s syndicated revolving credit facilities are also available to support the purchase of $1,319 million of pollution control, solid waste disposal and industrial development revenue bonds in the event they are tendered by individual bondholders and not remarketed prior to maturity as well as the repayment of approximately $1,812 million of floating rate notes in the event an individual noteholder requires repayment at specified dates prior to maturity. As of December 31, 2023, approximately $3,311 million of NEECH's syndicated revolving credit facilities expire over the next 12 months. 

(b) Only available for the funding of loans. As of December 31, 2023, approximately $205 million of FPL's and $650 million of NEECH's bilateral revolving credit facilities expire over the next 12 months. See Note 13 regarding increases in capacity and borrowings subsequent to December 31, 2023. 

(c) Only available for the issuance of letters of credit. As of December 31, 2023, approximately $500 million of the letter of credit facilities expire over the next 12 months. 

Approximately 71 banks, located globally, participate in FPL&#8217;s and NEECH&#8217;s revolving credit facilities, with no one bank providing more than 5% of the combined revolving credit facilities. Pursuant to a 1998 guarantee agreement, NEE guarantees the payment of NEECH&#8217;s debt obligations under its revolving credit facilities. In order for FPL or NEECH to borrow or to have letters of credit issued under the terms of their respective revolving credit facilities and, also for NEECH, its letter of credit facilities, FPL, in the case of FPL, and NEE, in the case of NEECH, are required, among other things, to maintain a ratio of funded debt to total capitalization that does not exceed a stated ratio. The FPL and NEECH revolving credit facilities also contain default and related acceleration provisions relating to, among other things, failure of FPL and NEE, as the case may be, to maintain the respective ratio of funded debt to total capitalization at or below the specified ratio. At December 31, 2023, each of NEE and FPL was in compliance with its required ratio. 

Capital Support 

Guarantees, Letters of Credit, Surety Bonds and Indemnifications (Guarantee Arrangements) 

Certain subsidiaries of NEE issue guarantees and obtain letters of credit and surety bonds, as well as provide indemnities, to facilitate commercial transactions with third parties and financings. Substantially all of the guarantee arrangements are on behalf of NEE&#8217;s consolidated subsidiaries, as discussed in more detail below. See Note 8 regarding guarantees of obligations on behalf of NEP subsidiaries. NEE is not required to recognize liabilities associated with guarantee arrangements issued on behalf of its consolidated subsidiaries unless it becomes probable that they will be required to perform. At December 31, 2023, NEE believes that there is no material exposure related to these guarantee arrangements. 

NEE subsidiaries issue guarantees related to equity contribution agreements and engineering, procurement and construction agreements, associated with the development, construction and financing of certain power generation facilities (see Note 1 - Structured Payables) and a natural gas pipeline project under construction, as well as a related natural gas transportation agreement. Commitments associated with these activities are included and/or disclosed in the contracts table in Note 15. 

In addition, at December 31, 2023, NEE subsidiaries had approximately $6.1 billion in guarantees related to obligations under PPAs and acquisition agreements, nuclear-related activities, payment obligations related to PTCs, support for NEER's retail electricity provider activities, as well as other types of contractual obligations (see Note 15 &#8211; Commitments). 

s 

In some instances, subsidiaries of NEE elect to issue guarantees instead of posting other forms of collateral required under certain financing arrangements, as well as for other project-level cash management activities. At December 31, 2023, these guarantees totaled approximately $1.2 billion and support, among other things, cash management activities, including those related to debt service and operations and maintenance service agreements, as well as other specific project financing requirements. 

Subsidiaries of NEE also issue guarantees to support customer supply and proprietary power and gas trading activities, including the buying and selling of wholesale energy commodities. At December 31, 2023, the estimated mark-to-market exposure (the total amount that these subsidiaries of NEE could be required to fund based on energy commodity market prices at December 31, 2023) plus contract settlement net payables, net of collateral posted for obligations under these guarantees totaled approximately $1.8 billion. 

At December 31, 2023, subsidiaries of NEE also had approximately $5.1 billion of standby letters of credit and approximately $1.6 billion of surety bonds to support certain of the commercial activities discussed above. FPL's and NEECH's credit facilities are available to support substantially all of the standby letters of credit. 

In addition, as part of contract negotiations in the normal course of business, certain subsidiaries of NEE have agreed and in the future may agree to make payments to compensate or indemnify other parties, including those associated with asset divestitures, for possible unfavorable financial consequences resulting from specified events. The specified events may include, but are not limited to, an adverse judgment in a lawsuit, or the imposition of additional taxes due to a change in tax law or interpretations of the tax law. NEE is unable to estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments by its subsidiaries under some of these contracts because events that would obligate them to make payments have not occurred or, if any such event has occurred, they have not been notified of its occurrence. 

NEECH, a 100% owned subsidiary of NEE, provides funding for, and holds ownership interests in, NEE's operating subsidiaries other than FPL. NEE has fully and unconditionally guaranteed certain payment obligations of NEECH, including most of its debt and all of its debentures registered pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and commercial paper issuances, as well as most of its payment guarantees and indemnifications, and NEECH has guaranteed certain debt and other obligations of subsidiaries within the NEER segment. Certain guarantee arrangements described above contain requirements for NEECH and FPL to maintain a specified credit rating. For a discussion of credit rating downgrade triggers, see Credit Ratings below. 

NEE fully and unconditionally guarantees NEECH debentures pursuant to a guarantee agreement, dated as of June 1, 1999 (1999 guarantee) and NEECH junior subordinated debentures pursuant to an indenture, dated as of September 1, 2006 (2006 guarantee). The 1999 guarantee is an unsecured obligation of NEE and ranks equally and ratably with all other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of NEE. The 2006 guarantee is unsecured and subordinate and junior in right of payment to NEE senior indebtedness (as defined therein). No payment on those junior subordinated debentures may be made under the 2006 guarantee until all NEE senior indebtedness has been paid in full in certain circumstances. NEE&#8217;s and NEECH&#8217;s ability to meet their financial obligations are primarily dependent on their subsidiaries&#8217; net income, cash flows and their ability to pay upstream dividends or to repay funds to NEE and NEECH. The dividend-paying ability of some of the subsidiaries is limited by contractual restrictions which are contained in outstanding financing agreements. 

s 

Summarized financial information of NEE and NEECH is as follows: 

##TABLE_START Year Ended December 31, 2023 Issuer/Guarantor Combined (a) 

NEECH Consolidated (b) 

NEE Consolidated (b) 

(millions) Operating revenues $ (20) $ 9,878 &#160; $ 28,114 &#160; Operating income (loss) $ (359) $ 3,918 &#160; $ 10,237 &#160; Net income (loss) $ (867) $ 1,736 &#160; $ 6,282 &#160; Net income (loss) attributable to NEE/NEECH $ (867) $ 2,764 &#160; $ 7,310 &#160; ##TABLE_END

##TABLE_START December 31, 2023 Issuer/Guarantor Combined (a) 

NEECH Consolidated (b) 

NEE Consolidated (b) 

(millions) Total current assets $ 1,860 &#160; $ 10,559 &#160; $ 15,361 &#160; Total noncurrent assets $ 2,491 &#160; $ 76,550 &#160; $ 162,128 &#160; Total current liabilities $ 6,709 &#160; $ 20,192 &#160; $ 27,963 &#160; Total noncurrent liabilities $ 28,874 &#160; $ 47,940 &#160; $ 90,502 &#160; Redeemable noncontrolling interests $ &#8212; &#160; $ 1,256 &#160; $ 1,256 &#160; Noncontrolling interests $ &#8212; &#160; $ 10,300 &#160; $ 10,300 &#160; ##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) Excludes intercompany transactions, and investments in, and equity in earnings of, subsidiaries. 

(b) Information has been prepared on the same basis of accounting as NEE's consolidated financial statements. 

Shelf Registration 

In March 2021, NEE, NEECH and FPL filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC for an unspecified amount of securities, which became effective upon filing. The amount of securities issuable by the companies is established from time to time by their respective boards of directors. Securities that may be issued under the registration statement include, depending on the registrant, senior debt securities, subordinated debt securities, junior subordinated debentures, first mortgage bonds, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units, warrants and guarantees related to certain of those securities. 

s 

Credit Ratings 

NEE&#8217;s liquidity, ability to access credit and capital markets, cost of borrowings and collateral posting requirements under certain agreements is dependent on its and its subsidiaries credit ratings. At February 16, 2024, Moody&#8217;s Investors Service, Inc. (Moody&#8217;s), S&#38;P Global Ratings (S&#38;P) and Fitch Ratings, Inc. (Fitch) had assigned the following credit ratings to NEE, FPL and NEECH: 

##TABLE_START Moody's (a) 

S&#38;P (a) 

Fitch (a) 

NEE: (b) 

Corporate credit rating 

Baa1 A- A- 

FPL: (b) 

Corporate credit rating 

A1 A A First mortgage bonds 

Aa2 A+ AA- Senior unsecured notes 

A1 A A+ Pollution control, solid waste disposal and industrial development revenue bonds (c) 

VMIG-1/P-1 A-1 F1 Commercial paper 

P-1 A-1 F1 

NEECH: (b) 

Corporate credit rating 

Baa1 A- A- Debentures 

Baa1 BBB+ A- Junior subordinated debentures 

Baa2 BBB BBB Commercial paper 

P-2 A-2 F2 ##TABLE_END

_________________________ 

(a) A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and should be evaluated independently of any other rating. The rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. 

(b) The outlook indicated by each of Moody's, S&#38;P and Fitch is stable. 

(c) Short-term ratings are presented as all bonds outstanding are currently paying a short-term interest rate. At FPL's election, a portion or all of the bonds may be adjusted to a long-term interest rate. 

NEE and its subsidiaries have no credit rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity dates of outstanding debt. A change in ratings is not an event of default under applicable debt instruments, and while there are conditions to drawing on the credit facilities noted above, the maintenance of a specific minimum credit rating is not a condition to drawing on these credit facilities. 

Commitment fees and interest rates on loans under these credit facilities&#8217; agreements are tied to credit ratings. A ratings downgrade also could reduce the accessibility and increase the cost of commercial paper and other short-term debt issuances and borrowings and additional or replacement credit facilities. In addition, a ratings downgrade could result in, among other things, the requirement that NEE subsidiaries post collateral under certain agreements and guarantee arrangements, including, but not limited to, those related to fuel procurement, power sales and purchases, nuclear decommissioning funding, debt-related reserves and trading activities. FPL&#8217;s and NEECH&#8217;s credit facilities are available to support these potential requirements. 

Covenants 

NEE's charter does not limit the dividends that may be paid on its common stock. As a practical matter, the ability of NEE to pay dividends on its common stock is dependent upon, among other things, dividends paid to it by its subsidiaries. For example, FPL pays dividends to NEE in a manner consistent with FPL's long-term targeted capital structure. However, the mortgage securing FPL's first mortgage bonds contains provisions which, under certain conditions, restrict the payment of dividends to NEE and the issuance of additional first mortgage bonds. Additionally, in some circumstances, the mortgage restricts the amount of retained earnings that FPL can use to pay cash dividends on its common stock. The restricted amount may change based on factors set out in the mortgage. Other than this restriction on the payment of common stock dividends, the mortgage does not restrict FPL's use of retained earnings. At December 31, 2023, no retained earnings were restricted by these provisions of the mortgage and, in light of FPL's current financial condition and level of earnings, management does not expect that planned financing activities or dividends would be affected by these limitations. 

FPL may issue first mortgage bonds under its mortgage subject to its meeting an adjusted net earnings test set forth in the mortgage, wh ich generally requires adjusted net earnings to be at least twice the annual interest requirements on, or at least 10% of the aggregate principal amount of, FPL&#8217;s first mortgage bonds including those to be issued and all indebtedness of FPL that ranks prior or equal to the first mortgage bonds. At December 31, 2023, coverage for the 12 months ended December 31, 2023 would have been approximately 9.6 times the annual interest requirements and approximately 4.1 times the aggregate principal requirements. New first mortgage bonds are also limited to an amount equal to the sum of 60% of unfunded property additions after adjustments to offset property retirements, the amount of retired first mortgage bonds or qualified lien bonds and the amount of cash on deposit with the mortgage trustee. At December 31, 2023, FPL could have issued in excess of $34 billion of additional first mortgage bonds based on the unfunded property additions and retired first mortgage bonds. At December 31, 2023, no cash was deposited with the mortgage trustee for these purposes. 

s 

In September 2006, NEE and NEECH executed a Replacement Capital Covenant (as amended, September 2006 RCC) in connection with NEECH's offering of $350 million principal amount of Series B Enhanced Junior Subordinated Debentures due 2066 (Series B junior subordinated debentures). The September 2006 RCC is for the benefit of persons that buy, hold or sell a specified series of long-term indebtedness (covered debt) of NEECH (other than the Series B junior subordinated debentures) or, in certain cases, of NEE. NEECH's 3.50% Debentures, Series due April 1, 2029 have been designated as the covered debt under the September 2006 RCC. The September 2006 RCC provides that NEECH may redeem, and NEE or NEECH may purchase, any Series B junior subordinated debentures on or before October 1, 2036, only to the extent that the redemption or purchase price does not exceed a specified amount of proceeds from the sale of qualifying securities, subject to certain limitations described in the September 2006 RCC. Qualifying securities are securities that have equity-like characteristics that are the same as, or more equity-like than, the Series B junior subordinated debentures at the time of redemption or purchase, which are sold within 365 days prior to the date of the redemption or repurchase of the Series B junior subordinated debentures. 

In June 2007, NEE and NEECH executed a Replacement Capital Covenant (as amended, June 2007 RCC) in connection with NEECH's offering of $400 million principal amount of its Series C Junior Subordinated Debentures due 2067 (Series C junior subordinated debentures). The June 2007 RCC is for the benefit of persons that buy, hold or sell a specified series of covered debt of NEECH (other than the Series C junior subordinated debentures) or, in certain cases, of NEE. NEECH's 3.50% Debentures, Series due April 1, 2029 have been designated as the covered debt under the June 2007 RCC. The June 2007 RCC provides that NEECH may redeem or purchase, or satisfy, discharge or defease (collectively, defease), and NEE and any majority-owned subsidiary of NEE or NEECH may purchase, any Series C junior subordinated debentures on or before June 15, 2037, only to the extent that the principal amount defeased or the applicable redemption or purchase price does not exceed a specified amount raised from the issuance, during the 365 days prior to the date of that redemption, purchase or defeasance, of qualifying securities that have equity-like characteristics that are the same as, or more equity-like than, the applicable characteristics of the Series C junior subordinated debentures at the time of redemption, purchase or defeasance, subject to certain limitations described in the June 2007 RCC. 

CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES 

NEE&#8217;s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, which were prepared under GAAP. Critical accounting policies are those that NEE believes are both most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations, and require complex, subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. 

NEE considers the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing its consolidated financial statements: 

Accounting for Derivatives and Hedging Activities 

NEE uses derivative instruments (primarily swaps, options, futures and forwards) to manage the physical and financial risks inherent in the purchase and sale of fuel and electricity, as well as interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate risk associated primarily with outstanding and expected future debt issuances and borrowings. In addition, NEE, through NEER, uses derivatives to optimize the value of its power generation and gas infrastructure assets and engages in power and fuel marketing and trading activities to take advantage of expected future favorable price movements. 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

Accounting pronouncements require the use of fair value accounting if certain conditions are met, which may require significant judgment to measure the fair value of assets and liabilities. This applies not only to traditional financial derivative instruments, but to any contract having the accounting characteristics of a derivative. As a result, significant judgment must be used in applying derivatives accounting guidance to contracts. In the event changes in interpretation occur, it is possible that contracts that currently are excluded from derivatives accounting rules would have to be recorded on the balance sheet at fair value, with changes in the fair value recorded in the statement of income. 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

Derivative instruments, when required to be marked to market, are recorded on the balance sheet at fair value using a combination of market and income approaches. Fair values for some of the longer-term contracts where liquid markets are not available are derived through the use of industry-standard valuation techniques, such as internally developed models which estimate the fair value of a contract by calculating the present value of the difference between the contract price and the forward prices. Forward prices represent the price at which a buyer or seller could contract today to purchase or sell a commodity at a future date. The near-term forward market for electricity is generally liquid and therefore the prices in the early years of the forward curves reflect observable market quotes. However, in the later years, the market is much less liquid and forward price curves must be developed using factors including the forward prices for the commodities used as fuel to generate electricity, the expected system heat rate (which measures the efficiency of power plants in converting fuel to electricity) in the region where the 

s 

purchase or sale takes place, and a fundamental forecast of expected spot prices based on modeled supply and demand in the region. NEE estimates the fair value of interest rate and foreign currency derivatives using an income approach based on a discounted cash flows valuation technique utilizing the net amount of estimated future cash inflows and outflows related to the derivative agreements. The assumptions in these models are critical since any changes therein could have a significant impact on the fair value of the derivative. 

At FPL, substantially all changes in the fair value of energy derivative transactions are deferred as a regulatory asset or liability until the contracts are settled, and, upon settlement, any gains or losses are passed through the fuel clause . See Note 3. 

In NEE&#8217;s non-rate regulated operations, predominantly NextEra Energy Resources, essentially all changes in the derivatives&#8217; fair value for power purchases and sales, fuel sales and trading activities are recognized on a net basis in operating revenues and the equity method investees&#8217; related activity is recognized in equity in earnings (losses) of equity method investees in NEE&#8217;s consolidated statements of income. 

For interest rate and foreign currency derivative instruments, all changes in the derivatives' fair value are recognized in interest expense and the equity method investees' related activity is recognized in equity in earnings (losses) of equity method investees in NEE's consolidated statements of income. NEE estimates the fair value of these derivatives using an income approach based on a discounted cash flows valuation technique utilizing observable inputs. 

Certain derivative transactions at NEER are entered into as economic hedges but the transactions do not meet the requirements for hedge accounting, hedge accounting treatment is not elected or hedge accounting has been discontinued. Changes in the fair value of those transactions are marked to market and reported in the consolidated statements of income, resulting in earnings volatility. These changes in fair value are reflected in the non-qualifying hedge category in computing adjusted earnings and could be significant to NEER&#8217;s results because the economic offset to the positions are not marked to market. As a consequence, NEE's net income reflects only the movement in one part of economically-linked transactions. For example, a gain (loss) in the non-qualifying hedge category for certain energy derivatives is offset by decreases (increases) in the fair value of related physical asset positions in the portfolio or contracts, which are not marked to market under GAAP. For this reason, NEE&#8217;s management views results expressed excluding the unrealized mark-to-market impact of the non-qualifying hedges as a meaningful measure of current period performance. For additional information regarding derivative instruments, see Note 3, Overview and Energy Marketing and Trading and Market Risk Sensitivity. 

Accounting for Pension Benefits 

NEE sponsors a qualified noncontributory defined benefit pension plan for substantially all employees of NEE and its subsidiaries. Management believes that, based on actuarial assumptions and the well-funded status of the pension plan, NEE will not be required to make any cash contributions to the qualified pension plan in the near future. The qualified pension plan has a fully funded trust dedicated to providing benefits under the plan. NEE allocates net periodic income associated with the pension plan to its subsidiaries annually using specific criteria. 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

For the pension plan, the benefit obligation is the actuarial present value, as of the December 31 measurement date, of all benefits attributed by the pension benefit formula to employee service rendered to that date. The amount of benefit to be paid depends on a number of future events incorporated into the pension benefit formula, including an estimate of the average remaining life of employees/survivors as well as the average years of service rendered. The projected benefit obligation is measured based on assumptions concerning future interest rates and future employee compensation levels. NEE derives pension income from actuarial calculations based on the plan&#8217;s provisions and various management assumptions including discount rate, rate of increase in compensation levels and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

Accounting guidance requires recognition of the funded status of the pension plan in the balance sheet, with changes in the funded status recognized in other comprehensive income within shareholders&#8217; equity in the year in which the changes occur. Since NEE is the plan sponsor, and its subsidiaries do not have separate rights to the plan assets or direct obligations to their employees, this accounting guidance is reflected at NEE and not allocated to the subsidiaries. The portion of previously unrecognized actuarial gains and losses and prior service costs or credits that are estimated to be allocable to FPL as net periodic (income) cost in future periods and that otherwise would be recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income are classified as regulatory assets and liabilities at NEE in accordance with regulatory treatment. 

s 

Net periodic pension income is calculated using a number of actuarial assumptions. Those assumptions for the years ended December 31, 2023, 2022 and 2021 include: 

##TABLE_START &#160; 2023 2022 2021 Discount rate 5.05 % 2.87 % 2.53 % Salary increase 4.90 % 4.90 % 4.40 % Expected long-term rate of return, net of investment management fees 8.00 % 7.35 % 7.35 % Weighted-average interest crediting rate 3.82 % 3.79 % 3.82 % ##TABLE_END

In developing these assumptions, NEE evaluated input, including other qualitative and quantitative factors, from its actuaries and consultants, as well as information available in the marketplace. Discount rates are established using the full yield curve approach. In addition, for the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, NEE considered different models, capital market return assumptions and historical returns for a portfolio with an equity/bond asset mix similar to its pension fund, as well as its pension fund's historical compounded returns. NEE will continue to evaluate all of its actuarial assumptions, including its expected rate of return, at least annually, and will adjust them as appropriate. 

NEE utilizes in its determination of pension income a market-related valuation of plan assets. This market-related valuation reduces year-to-year volatility and recognizes investment gains or losses over a five-year period following the year in which they occur. Investment gains or losses for this purpose are the difference between the expected return calculated using the market-related value of plan assets and the actual return realized on those plan assets. Since the market-related value of plan assets recognizes gains or losses over a five-year period, the future value of plan assets will be affected as previously deferred gains or losses are recognized. Such gains and losses together with other differences between actual results and the estimates used in the actuarial valuations are deferred and recognized in determining pension income only to the extent they exceed 10% of the greater of projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of plan assets. 

The following table illustrates the effect on net periodic pension income of changing the critical actuarial assumptions discussed above, while holding all other assumptions constant: 

##TABLE_START Increase (Decrease) in 2023 

Net Periodic Pension Income 

Change in Assumption NEE FPL (millions) Expected long-term rate of return 0.5% $ 25 $ 16 Discount rate (0.5)% $ 1 $ 1 Salary increase 0.5% $ (2) $ (1) ##TABLE_END

NEE also utilizes actuarial assumptions about mortality to help estimate obligations of the pension plan. NEE has adopted the latest revised mortality tables and mortality improvement scales released by the Society of Actuaries, which did not have a material impact on the pension plan's obligation. 

See Note 12. 

Carrying Value of Long-Lived Assets 

NEE evaluates long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

The amount of future net cash flows, the timing of the cash flows and the determination of an appropriate interest rate all involve estimates and judgments about future events. In particular, the aggregate amount of cash flows determines whether an impairment exists, and the timing of the cash flows is critical in determining fair value. Because each assessment is based on the facts and circumstances associated with each long-lived asset, the effects of changes in assumptions cannot be generalized. 

s 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

An impairment loss is required to be recognized if the carrying value of the asset exceeds the undiscounted future net cash flows associated with that asset. The impairment loss to be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds the asset&#8217;s fair value. In most instances, the fair value is determined by discounting estimated future cash flows using an appropriate interest rate. 

Carrying Value of Equity Method Investments 

NEE tests its equity method investments for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the investment is less than the carrying value . 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

Indicators of impairment may include, but are not limited to, a series of operating losses of an investee, the absence of an ability to recover the carrying amount of the investment, the inability of the investee to sustain an earnings capacity and a current fair value of an investment that may be less than its carrying value. If indicators of impairment exist, an estimate of the investment&#8217;s fair value will be calculated. Approaches for estimating fair value include, among others, an income approach using a probability-weighted discounted cash flows model, a market approach using an earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) multiple model, and a market observable transaction. The probability assigned to each scenario as well as the cash flows and EBITDA multiple identified are critical in determining fair value. 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

An impairment loss is required to be recognized if the impairment is deemed to be other than temporary. Assessment of whether an investment is other than temporarily impaired involves, among other factors, consideration of the length of time that the fair value is below the carrying value, current expected performance relative to the expected performance when the investment was initially made, performance relative to peers, industry performance relative to the economy, credit rating, regulatory actions and legal and permitting challenges. If management is unable to reasonably assert that an impairment is temporary or believes that there will not be full recovery of the carrying value of its investment, then the impairment is considered to be other than temporary. Investments that are other than temporarily impaired are written down to their estimated fair value and cannot subsequently be written back up for increases in estimated fair value. Impairment losses are recorded in equity in earnings (losses) of equity method investees in NEE&#8217;s consolidated statements of income. See Note 4 &#8211; Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements. 

Decommissioning and Dismantlement 

NEE accounts for asset retirement obligations and conditional asset retirement obligations (collectively, AROs) under accounting guidance that requires a liability for the fair value of an ARO to be recognized in the period in which it is incurred if it can be reasonably estimated, with the offsetting associated asset retirement costs capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived assets. NEE's AROs relate primarily to decommissioning obligations of FPL's and NEER's nuclear units and to obligations for the dismantlement of certain of NEER's wind and solar facilities. 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

The calculation of the future cost of retiring long-lived assets, including nuclear decommissioning and plant dismantlement costs, involves estimating the amount and timing of future expenditures and making judgments concerning whether or not such costs are considered a legal obligation. Estimating the amount and timing of future expenditures includes, among other things, making projections of when assets will be retired and ultimately decommissioned and how costs will escalate with inflation. In addition, NEE also makes interest rate and rate of return projections on its investments in determining recommended funding requirements for nuclear decommissioning costs. Periodically, NEE is required to update these estimates and projections which can affect the annual expense amounts recognized, the liabilities recorded and the annual funding requirements for nuclear decommissioning costs. For example, an increase of 0.25% in the assumed escalation rates for nuclear decommissioning costs would increase NEE&#8217;s AROs at December 31, 2023 by approximately $93 million. 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

FPL &#8211; For ratemaking purpos es, FPL accrues and funds for nuclear plant decommissioning costs over the expected service life of each unit based on studies that are approved by the FPSC. The most recent studies, filed in 2020, reflect, among other things, the expiration dates of the operating licenses for FPL&#8217;s nuclear units at the time of the studies. FPL&#8217;s portion of the future cost of decommissioning its four nuclear units, including spent fuel storage above what is expected to be refunded by the DOE under a spent fuel settlement agreement, is estimated to be approximately $9.4 billion, or $2.5 billion expressed in 2023 dollars. The ultimate costs of decommissioning reflect the applications submitted to the NRC for the extension of Turkey Point Units Nos. 3 and 4 and St. Lucie Units Nos. 1 and 2 licenses for an additional 20 years. 

s 

FPL accrues the cost of dismantling its other generation plants over the expected service life of each unit based on studies filed with the FPSC. Unlike nuclear decommissioning, dismantlement costs are not funded. The most recent studies became effective January 1, 2022. At December 31, 2023, FPL&#8217;s portion of the ultimate cost to dismantle its other generation units is approximately $2.4 billion, or $1.2 billion expressed in 2023 dollars. The majority of the dismantlement costs are not reported as AROs. FPL accrues for interim removal costs over the life of the related assets based on depreciation studies approved by the FPSC. Any differences between the amount of the ARO and the amount recorded for ratemaking purposes are reported as a regulatory asset or liability in accordance with regulatory accounting. 

The components of FPL&#8217;s decommissioning of nuclear plants, dismantlement of plants and other accrued asset removal costs are as follows: 

##TABLE_START Nuclear Decommissioning Other Generation Plant Dismantlement Interim Removal Costs and Other Total December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, 2023 2022 2023 2022 2023 2022 2023 2022 (millions) 

AROs (a) 

$ 1,882 &#160; $ 1,807 $ 283 &#160; $ 362 $ 5 &#160; $ 7 $ 2,170 &#160; 

$ 2,176 &#160; Less capitalized ARO asset net of accumulated depreciation 

59 &#160; 61 28 &#160; 40 &#8212; &#160; 1 87 &#160; 102 

Accrued asset removal costs (b) 

480 &#160; 406 182 &#160; 179 (1,023) (494) (361) 91 Asset retirement obligation regulatory expense difference (c) 

4,202 &#160; 3,515 (150) (212) &#8212; &#160; (18) 4,052 &#160; 3,285 Accrued decommissioning, dismantlement and other accrued asset removal costs (d) 

$ 6,505 &#160; $ 5,667 $ 287 &#160; $ 289 $ (1,018) $ (506) $ 5,774 &#160; $ 5,450 ##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) See Note 11. 

(b) Included in noncurrent regulatory liabilities on NEE&#8217;s and FPL&#8217;s consolidated balance sheets, except for $1,021 million and $532 million which are related to interim removal costs and are included in noncurrent regulatory assets as of December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 1 &#8211; Rate Regulation. 

(c) Included in noncurrent regulatory liabilities on NEE's and FPL's consolidated balance sheets, except for $14 million and $38 million which are related to other generation plant dismantlement and are included in noncurrent regulatory assets as of December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. 

(d) Represents total amount accrued for ratemaking purposes. 

NEER &#8211; NEER records liabilities for the present value of its expected nuclear plant decommissioning costs which are determined using various internal and external data and applying a probability percentage to a variety of scenarios regarding the life of the plant and timing of decommissioning. The liabilities are being accreted using the interest method through the date decommissioning activities are expected to be complete. At December 31, 2023 and 2022 , the AROs for decommissioning of NEER&#8217;s nuclear plants approximate d $607 million and $ 604 million, respectively. NEER&#8217;s portion of the ultimate cost of decommissioning its nuclear plants, including costs associated with spent fuel storage above what is expected to be refunded by the DOE under a spent fuel settlement agreement, is estimated to be approxima tely $9.8 billion, or $2.2 billion ex pressed in 2023 dollars. 

See Note 1 &#8211; Asset Retirement Obligations and &#8211; Decommissioning of Nuclear Plants, Dismantlement of Plants and Other Accrued Asset Removal Costs and Note 11. 

Regulatory Accounting 

Certain of NEE's businesses are subject to rate regulation which results in the recording of regulatory assets and liabilities. See Note 1 &#8211; Rate Regulation for details regarding NEE&#8217;s regulatory assets and liabilities. 

Nature of Accounting Estimates 

Regulatory assets and liabilities represent probable future revenues that will be recovered from or refunded to customers through the ratemaking process. Regulatory assets and liabilities are included in rate base or otherwise earn (pay) a return on investment during the recovery period. 

Assumptions and Accounting Approach 

Accounting guidance allows regulators to create assets and impose liabilities that would not be recorded by non-rate regulated entities. If NEE's rate-regulated entities, primarily FPL, were no longer subject to cost-based rate regulation, the existing regulatory assets and liabilities would be written off unless regulators specify an alternative means of recovery or refund. In addition, the regulators, including the FPSC for FPL, have the authority to disallow recovery of costs that they consider excessive or imprudently incurred. Such costs may include, among others, fuel and O&#38;M expenses, the cost of replacing power lost when generation facilities are unavailable, storm restoration costs and costs associated with the construction or acquisition of new facilities. The continued applicability of regulatory accounting is assessed at each reporting period. 

s 

ENERGY MARKETING AND TRADING AND MARKET RISK SENSITIVITY 

NEE and FPL are exposed to risks associated with adverse changes in commodity prices, interest rates and equity prices. Financial instruments and positions affecting the financial statements of NEE and FPL described below are held primarily for purposes other than trading. Market risk is measured as the potential loss in fair value resulting from hypothetical reasonably possible changes in commodity prices, interest rates or equity prices over the next year. Management has established risk management policies to monitor and manage such market risks, as well as credit risks. 

Commodity Price Risk 

NEE and FPL use derivative instruments (primarily swaps, options, futures and forwards) to manage the physical and financial risks inherent in the purchase and sale of fuel and electricity. In addition, NEE, through NEER, uses derivatives to optimize the value of its power generation and gas infrastructure assets and engages in power and fuel marketing and trading activities to take advantage of expected future favorable price movements. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates &#8211; Accounting for Derivatives and Hedging Activities and Note 3. 

During 2022 and 2023, the changes in the fair value of NEE&#8217;s consolidated subsidiaries&#8217; energy contract derivative instruments were as follows: 

##TABLE_START Hedges on Owned Assets Trading Non- Qualifying FPL Cost Recovery Clauses NEE Total (millions) Fair value of contracts outstanding at December 31, 2021 

$ 978 $ (1,392) $ 1 $ (413) Reclassification to realized at settlement of contracts 

(355) 1,094 (197) 542 Value of contracts acquired 

16 54 &#8212; 70 Net option premium purchases (issuances) 

146 12 &#8212; 158 Changes in fair value excluding reclassification to realized 

392 (3,689) 212 (3,085) Fair value of contracts outstanding at December 31, 2022 

1,177 (3,921) 16 (2,728) Reclassification to realized at settlement of contracts 

(369) 154 &#160; (9) (224) Value of contracts acquired 

6 &#160; 95 &#160; &#8212; &#160; 101 &#160; Net option premium purchases (issuances) 

183 &#160; 17 &#160; &#8212; &#160; 200 &#160; Changes in fair value excluding reclassification to realized 

340 &#160; 2,178 &#160; 5 &#160; 2,523 &#160; Fair value of contracts outstanding at December 31, 2023 

1,337 &#160; (1,477) 12 &#160; (128) Net margin cash collateral paid (received) 

360 &#160; Total mark-to-market energy contract net assets (liabilities) at December 31, 2023 

$ 1,337 &#160; $ (1,477) $ 12 &#160; $ 232 &#160; ##TABLE_END

NEE&#8217;s total mark-to-market energy contract net assets (liabilities) at December 31, 2023 shown above are included on the consolidated balance sheets as follows: 

##TABLE_START December 31, 2023 (millions) Current derivative assets $ 1,541 &#160; Noncurrent derivative assets 1,594 &#160; Current derivative liabilities (802) Noncurrent derivative liabilities (2,101) NEE's total mark-to-market energy contract net liabilities $ 232 &#160; ##TABLE_END

s 

The sources of fair value estimates and maturity of energy contract derivative instruments at December 31, 2023 were as follows: 

##TABLE_START Maturity 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 Thereafter Total (millions) Trading: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets $ (780) $ (248) $ (22) $ (15) $ 34 $ 45 $ (986) Significant other observable inputs 611 379 194 121 37 15 1,357 Significant unobservable inputs 537 101 44 32 12 240 966 Total 368 232 216 138 83 300 1,337 

Owned Assets &#8211; Non-Qualifying: 

&#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets (21) (87) (38) (15) (14) 5 (170) Significant other observable inputs (224) (278) (239) (186) (99) (242) (1,268) Significant unobservable inputs 46 (34) (39) (38) (4) 30 (39) Total (199) (399) (316) (239) (117) (207) (1,477) 

Owned Assets &#8211; FPL Cost Recovery Clauses: 

&#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; Significant other observable inputs (8) (2) (1) (1) &#8212; &#8212; (12) Significant unobservable inputs 13 11 (1) 1 &#8212; &#8212; 24 Total 5 9 (2) &#8212; &#8212; &#8212; 12 Total sources of fair value $ 174 $ (158) $ (102) $ (101) $ (34) $ 93 $ (128) ##TABLE_END

With respect to commodities, NEE&#8217;s Exposure Management Committee (EMC), which is comprised of certain members of senior management, and NEE's chief executive officer are responsible for the overall approval of market risk management policies and the delegation of approval and authorization levels. The EMC and NEE's chief executive officer receive periodic updates on market positions and related exposures, credit exposures and overall risk management activities. 

NEE uses a value-at-risk (VaR) model to measure commodity price market risk in its trading and mark-to-market portfolios. The VaR is the estimated loss of market value based on a one-day holding period at a 95% confidence level using historical simulation methodology. The VaR figures are as follows: 

##TABLE_START Trading (a) 

Non-Qualifying Hedges 

and Hedges in FPL Cost Recovery Clauses (b) 

Total FPL NEER NEE FPL NEER NEE FPL NEER NEE (millions) December 31, 2022 $ &#8212; $ 41 $ 41 $ 3 $ 148 $ 145 $ 3 $ 125 $ 120 December 31, 2023 $ &#8212; &#160; $ 4 &#160; $ 4 &#160; $ 2 &#160; $ 114 &#160; $ 116 &#160; $ 2 &#160; $ 113 &#160; $ 111 &#160; 

Average for the year ended December 31, 2023 

$ &#8212; &#160; $ 12 &#160; $ 12 &#160; $ 3 &#160; $ 135 &#160; $ 134 &#160; $ 3 &#160; $ 134 &#160; $ 133 &#160; ##TABLE_END

______________________ 

(a) The VaR figures for the trading portfolio include positions that are marked to market. Taking into consideration offsetting unmarked non-derivative positions, such as physical inventory, the trading VaR figures were approximately $1 million and $18 million at December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. 

(b) Non-qualifying hedges are employed to reduce the market risk exposure to physical assets or contracts which are not marked to market. The VaR figures for the non-qualifying hedges and hedges in FPL cost recovery clauses category do not represent the economic exposure to commodity price movements. 

Interest Rate Risk 

NEE's and FPL's financial results are exposed to risk resulting from changes in interest rates as a result of their respective outstanding a nd expected future issuances of d ebt, investments in special use funds and other investments. NEE and FPL manage their respective interest rate exposure by monitoring current interest rates, entering into interest rate contracts and using a combination of fixed rate and variable rate debt. Interest rate contracts are used to mitigate and adjust interest rate exposure when deemed appropriate based upon market conditions or when required by financing agreements. 

s 

The following are estimates of the fair value of NEE's and FPL's financial instruments that are exposed to interest rate risk: 

##TABLE_START &#160; December 31, 2023 &#160; December 31, 2022 &#160; Carrying Amount Estimated 

Fair Value (a) 

&#160; Carrying Amount Estimated 

Fair Value (a) 

&#160; (millions) NEE: &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; Fixed income securities: &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; Special use funds $ 2,222 &#160; $ 2,222 &#160; $ 2,061 $ 2,061 Other investments, primarily debt securities $ 1,802 &#160; $ 1,802 &#160; $ 781 $ 781 Long-term debt, including current portion $ 68,306 &#160; $ 64,103 &#160; $ 61,889 $ 57,892 Interest rate contracts &#8211; net unrealized gains (losses) 

$ (249) $ (249) $ 392 $ 392 FPL: &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; &#160; Fixed income securities: Special use funds $ 1,658 &#160; $ 1,658 &#160; $ 1,572 $ 1,572 Other investments &#8211; debt securities 

$ &#8212; &#160; $ &#8212; &#160; $ 114 $ 114 Long-term debt, including current portion $ 25,274 &#160; $ 23,430 &#160; $ 21,002 $ 19,364 ##TABLE_END ______________________ 

(a) See Note 3 and Note 4. 

The special use funds of NEE and FPL consist of restricted funds set aside to cover the cost of storm damage for FPL and for the decommissioning of NEE's and FPL's nuclear power plants. See Note 1 &#8211; Storm Funds, Storm Reserves and Storm Cost Recovery. A portion of these funds is invested in fixed income debt securities primarily carried at estimated fair value. At FPL, changes in fair value, including any credit losses, result in a corresponding adjustment to the related regulatory asset or liability accounts based on current regulatory treatment. The changes in fair value for NEE's non-rate regulated operations result in a corresponding adjustment to other comprehensive income, except for credit losses and unrealized losses on available for sale securities intended or required to be sold prior to recovery of the amortized cost basis, which are reported in current period earnings. Because the funds set aside by FPL for storm damage could be needed at any time, the related investments are generally more liquid and, therefore, are less sensitive to changes in interest rates. The nuclear decommissioning funds, in contrast, are generally invested in longer-term securities. 

At December 31, 2023, NEE had interest rate contracts with a net notional amount of approximately $25.6 billion to manage exposure to the variability of cash flows primarily associated with expected future and outstanding debt issuances at NEECH and NEER. In January 2024, NEECH entered into a $4.0 billion interest rate contract which reduced the net notional amount. See Note 3. 

Based upon a hypothetical 10% decrease in interest rates, the fair value of NEE&#8217;s net liabilities would increase by approxim ately $2,705 million ($1,093 million f or FPL) at December 31, 2023. 

Equity Price Risk 

NEE and FPL are exposed to risk resulting from changes in prices for equity securities. For example, NEE&#8217;s nuclear decommissioning reserve funds include marketable equity securities carried at their market value of approximately $5,290 million and $4,437 million ($3,536 million and $2,905 million for FPL) at December 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. NEE's and FPL&#8217;s investment strategy for equity securities in their nuclear decommissioning reserve funds emphasizes marketable securities which are broadly diversified. At December 31, 2023, a hypothetical 10% decrease in the prices quoted on stock exchanges would result in an approximately $494 million ($322 million for FPL) reduction in fair value. For FPL, a corresponding adjustment would be made to the related regulatory asset or liability accounts based on current regulatory treatment, and for NEE&#8217;s non-rate regulated operations, a corresponding amount would be recorded in change in unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities held in NEER's nuclear decommissioning funds &#8211; net in NEE's consolidated statements of income. 

Credit Risk 

NEE and its subsidiaries, including FPL, are also exposed to credit risk through their energy marketing and trading operations. Credit risk is the risk that a financial loss will be incurred if a counterparty to a transaction does not fulfill its financial obligation. NEE manages counterparty credit risk for its subsidiaries with energy marketing and trading operations through established policies, including counterparty credit limits, and in some cases credit enhancements, such as cash prepayments, letters of credit, cash and other collateral and guarantees. 

s 

Credit risk is also managed through the use of master netting agreements. NEE&#8217;s credit department monitors current and forward credit exposure to counterparties and their affiliates, both on an individual and an aggregate basis. For all derivative and contractual transactions, NEE&#8217;s energy marketing and trading operations, which include FPL's energy marketing and trading division, are exposed to losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to these transactions. Some relevant considerations when assessing NEE&#8217;s energy marketing and trading operations&#8217; credit risk exposure include the following: 

&#8226; Operations are primarily concentrated in the energy industry. 

&#8226; Trade receivables and other financial instruments are predominately with energy, utility and financial services related companies, as well as municipalities, cooperatives and other trading companies in the U.S. 

&#8226; Overall credit risk is managed through established credit policies and is overseen by the EMC. 

&#8226; Prospective and existing customers are reviewed for creditworthiness based upon established standards, with customers not meeting minimum standards providing various credit enhancements or secured payment terms, such as letters of credit or the posting of margin cash collateral. 

&#8226; Master netting agreements are used to offset cash and noncash gains and losses arising from derivative instruments with the same counterparty. NEE&#8217;s policy is to have master netting agreements in place with significant counterparties. 

Based on NEE&#8217;s policies and risk exposures related to credit, NEE and FPL do not anticipate a material adverse effect on their financial statements as a result of counterparty nonperformance. At December 31, 2023, NEE's credit risk exposure associated with its energy marketing and trading counterparties, taking into account collateral and contractual netting rights, totaled approximately $3.5 billion ($83 million for FPL), of which approximately 93% (100% for FPL) was with companies that have investment grade credit ratings. See Note 1 &#8211; Credit Losses and Note 3. 



Instruction: 
According to the given information, 
1. Briefly describe the company overview and companys industry, using the structure: "Founded in xxxx, 'company name' is a xxxx that provides .....
2. Highlight core strengths and competitive advantages key products or services,
3. Include topics about end market (geography), major customers (blue chip or not), market share for market position section,
4. Identify current industry trends, opportunities, and challenges that influence the companys strategy,
5. Outline recent strategic initiatives such as product launches, acquisitions, or new partnerships, and describe the company's response to market conditions. 
Less than 300 words.


Instruction: Summarize the analysis, less than 130 words.